Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a type of cancer that develops in the lymphatic system, a network of vessels and glands spread throughout your body.
The lymphatic system is part of your immune system.
Clear fluid called lymph flows through the lymphatic vessels and contains infection-fighting white blood cells known as lymphocytes.
In non-Hodgkin lymphoma, the affected lymphocytes start to multiply in an abnormal way and begin to collect in certain parts of the lymphatic system, such as the lymph nodes (glands).
The affected lymphocytes lose their infection-fighting properties, making you more vulnerable to infection.
The most common symptom of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a painless swelling in a lymph node, usually in the neck, armpit or groin. 
Find out more about the symptoms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: Coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer
Who's affected
In the UK, more than 13,000 people are diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma each year.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma can occur at any age, but your chances of developing the condition increase as you get older, with just over a third of cases diagnosed in people over 75.
Slightly more men than women are affected.
What causes non-Hodgkin lymphoma?
The exact cause of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown.
But your risk of developing the condition is increased if:
you have a medical condition that weakens your immune system
you take immunosuppressant medication
you have previously been exposed to a common virus called the Epstein-Barr virus, which causes glandular fever
You also have a slightly increased risk of developing non-Hodgkin lymphoma if a first-degree relative (such as a parent or sibling) has had the condition.
How non-Hodgkin lymphoma is diagnosed
The only way to confirm a diagnosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is by carrying out a biopsy.
This is a minor surgical procedure where a sample of affected lymph node tissue is removed and studied in a laboratory.
Find out more about diagnosing non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Treatments for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
There are many subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but they can generally be put into 1 of 2 broad categories:
high-grade or aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma – where the cancer grows quickly and aggressively
low-grade or indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma – where the cancer grows slowly and you may not experience any symptoms for many years
The outlook and treatment for non-Hodgkin lymphoma varies greatly, depending on the exact type, grade and extent of the lymphoma, and the person's age.
Low-grade tumours do not necessarily require immediate medical treatment, but are harder to completely cure.
High-grade lymphomas need to be treated straight away, but tend to respond much better to treatment and can often be cured.
The main treatments used for non-Hodgkin lymphoma are:
chemotherapy
radiotherapy
a type of targeted treatment called monoclonal antibody therapy
Overall, most cases of non-Hodgkin lymphoma are considered very treatable.
You can read more detailed information about the outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma on the Cancer Research UK website.
But there's a risk of long-term problems after treatment, including infertility and an increased risk of developing another type of cancer in the future.
Page last reviewed: 19 October 2018
Next review due: 19 October 2021
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright