Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Eyelid problems
Find out what to do if you have a lump on your eyelid, or an eyelid that's swollen, sticky, itchy, drooping or twitching.
Most eyelid problems are harmless
Many eyelid problems are not serious.
It's fairly common to have any of these problems:
a lump that goes away by itself after 3 or 4 weeks
mildly itchy, flaky or sticky eyelids that clear up by themselves
swelling from a nearby insect bite, injury or operation that goes away after a week or so
twitching or blinking from time to time – often when you're tired
eyelids that droop (or get more "hooded") as you get older
Types of eyelid problems
Your symptoms might give you an idea of the cause. Do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Lump on eyelid
Swollen eyelid
Itchy, flaky or sticky eyelid
Drooping or hooded eyelid
Frequently twitching or blinking eyelid
You can ask a pharmacist about:
what you can do to treat it yourself
if you can buy anything to help – for example, cleaning solutions for sticky eyelids
if you need to see an optician or GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you're worried about an eyelid problem
it's getting worse or lasting a long time
your eyelid is painful or you're in a lot of discomfort
you have yellow lumps or patches around your eyes
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if:
your swollen eyelid is red, hot, painful, tender or blistered
your eyelid droops suddenly
the pain is in your eye (not your eyelid)
the white of your eye is very red, in part or all over
you're sensitive to light (photophobia)
your eyesight changes – for example, you see wavy lines or flashing
you have a very high temperature, or feel hot and shivery, or you feel generally unwell
you think it's an allergic reaction
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to NHS 111 or call 111.
Page last reviewed: 02 October 2020
Next review due: 02 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright