Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Legionnaires' disease
Legionnaires' disease is a lung infection you can get from inhaling droplets of water from things like air conditioning or hot tubs. It's uncommon but it can be very serious.
How you get Legionnaires' disease
You can get Legionnaires' disease if you breathe in tiny droplets of water containing bacteria that causes the infection.
It's usually caught in places like hotels, hospitals or offices where the bacteria have got into the water supply. It's less common to catch it at home.
You can get Legionnaires' disease from things like:
air conditioning systems
humidifiers
spa pools and hot tubs
taps and showers that are not used often
You cannot usually get it from:
drinking water that contains the bacteria
other people with the infection
places like ponds, lakes and rivers
Check if you have Legionnaires' disease
Symptoms of Legionnaires' disease include:
a cough
difficulty breathing
chest pain
a high temperature
flu-like symptoms
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you cannot breathe properly
you have chest pain
you feel like you have severe flu
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Important:
Could it be coronavirus (COVID-19)?
If you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, it could be COVID-19.
Get advice about symptoms of COVID-19 and what to do
Treatment for Legionnaires' disease
You may need to go into hospital if you're diagnosed with Legionnaires' disease.
Treatment in hospital may include:
antibiotics given directly into a vein
oxygen through a face mask or tubes in your nose
a machine to help you breathe
When you start to get better you might be able to take antibiotic tablets at home. Antibiotic treatment usually lasts 1 to 3 weeks.
Most people make a full recovery, but it might take a few weeks to feel back to normal.
Page last reviewed: 22 October 2020
Next review due: 22 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright