Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Blood in semen
Blood in semen is not usually caused by something serious, but you should get it checked by a GP just in case.
Check if you have blood in your semen
Blood in your semen can be:
bright red
pink
brown or reddish-brown
Sometimes there may be small lumps (clots) in the blood.
Depending on the cause, you may also have other symptoms like blood in your pee, pain when peeing or peeing more often than usual.
Causes of blood in semen
Most of the time it's not obvious what causes blood in semen and it goes away on its own.
But it's important to get it checked to make sure it's nothing serious.
Common causes of blood in semen include:
an infection, such as a urinary tract infection (UTI) or sexually transmitted infection (STI)
a recent procedure or test, such as transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP), a cystoscopy or a vasectomy
a problem with the prostate, such as prostatitis or an enlarged prostate
Rarely, blood in semen can be a sign of cancer, such as prostate cancer.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have blood in your semen
A GP can check for common causes and refer you to a specialist for more tests if needed.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for blood in semen
Blood in semen does not usually need to be treated. It often goes away by itself in a few days or weeks.
If a cause can be found, this may need to be treated.
For example, a urinary tract infection (UTI) or sexually transmitted infection (STI) may be treated with antibiotics.
Page last reviewed: 15 March 2022
Next review due: 15 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright