Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Chronic kidney disease
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Living with
Prevention
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a long-term condition where the kidneys don't work as well as they should.
It's a common condition often associated with getting older. It can affect anyone, but it's more common in people who are black or of south Asian origin.
CKD can get worse over time and eventually the kidneys may stop working altogether, but this is uncommon. Many people with CKD are able to live long lives with the condition.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and kidney disease from Kidney Care UK
Symptoms of CKD
There are usually no symptoms of kidney disease in the early stages. It may only be diagnosed if you have a blood or urine test for another reason and the results show a possible problem with your kidneys.
At a more advanced stage, symptoms can include:
tiredness
swollen ankles, feet or hands
shortness of breath
feeling sick
blood in your pee (urine)
See a GP if you have persistent or worrying symptoms that you think could be caused by kidney disease.
Find out more about the symptoms of CKD.
Causes of CKD
Chronic kidney disease is usually caused by other conditions that put a strain on the kidneys. Often it's the result of a combination of different problems.
CKD can be caused by:
high blood pressure – over time, this can put strain on the small blood vessels in the kidneys and stop the kidneys working properly
diabetes – too much glucose in your blood can damage the tiny filters in the kidneys
high cholesterol – this can cause a build-up of fatty deposits in the blood vessels supplying your kidneys, which can make it harder for them to work properly
kidney infections
glomerulonephritis – kidney inflammation
polycystic kidney disease – an inherited condition where growths called cysts develop in the kidneys
blockages in the flow of urine – for example, from kidney stones that keep coming back, or an enlarged prostate
long-term, regular use of certain medicines – such as lithium and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
You can help prevent CKD by making healthy lifestyle changes and ensuring any underlying conditions you have are well controlled.
Tests for CKD
CKD can be diagnosed using blood and urine tests. These tests look for high levels of certain substances in your blood and urine that are signs your kidneys aren't working properly.
If you're at a high risk of developing kidney disease (for example, you have a known risk factor such as high blood pressure or diabetes), you may be advised to have regular tests to check for CKD so it's found at an early stage.
The results of your blood and urine tests can be used to tell the stage of your kidney disease. This is a number that reflects how severe the damage to your kidneys is, with a higher number indicating more serious CKD.
Find out more about how CKD is diagnosed.
Treatments for CKD
There's no cure for CKD, but treatment can help relieve the symptoms and stop it getting worse.
Your treatment will depend on how severe your condition is.
The main treatments are:
lifestyle changes to help you remain as healthy as possible
medicine to control associated problems such as high blood pressure and high cholesterol
dialysis – treatment to replicate some of the kidney's functions; this may be necessary in advanced CKD
kidney transplant – this may also be necessary in advanced CKD
You'll also be advised to have regular check-ups to monitor your condition.
Find out more about how CKD is treated and living with CKD.
Outlook for CKD
CKD can range from a mild condition with no or few symptoms, to a very serious condition where the kidneys stop working, sometimes called kidney failure.
Most people with CKD will be able to control their condition with medicine and regular check-ups. CKD only progresses to kidney failure in around 1 in 50 people with the condition.
If you have CKD, even if it's mild, you're at an increased risk of developing other serious problems, such as cardiovascular disease. This is a group of conditions affecting the heart and blood vessels, which includes heart attack and stroke.
Cardiovascular disease is one of the main causes of death in people with kidney disease, although healthy lifestyle changes and medicine can help reduce your risk of developing it.
Want to know more?
Kidney Care UK: chronic kidney disease
National Kidney Federation: what is kidney disease
Kidney Research UK: chronic kidney disease
Information:
Social care and support guide
If you:
need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability
care for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled - including family members
Our guide to social care and support explains your options and where you can get support.
Page last reviewed: 29 August 2019
Next review due: 29 August 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright