Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Swollen glands
Swollen glands are a sign the body is fighting an infection. They usually get better by themselves within 2 weeks.
Check if your glands are swollen
Swollen glands feel like tender, painful lumps:
on each side of the neck
under the chin
in the armpits
around the groin
Glands (known as lymph glands or lymph nodes) swell near an infection to help your body fight it.
Sometimes a gland on just one side of the body swells.
You might also have other symptoms, such as a sore throat, cough or high temperature.
Things you can do yourself
Swollen glands should go down within 2 weeks.
You can help to ease the symptoms by:
resting
drinking plenty of fluids (to avoid dehydration)
taking painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen (do not give aspirin to children under 16)
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your swollen glands are getting bigger or they have not gone down within 2 weeks
they feel hard or do not move when you press them
you're having night sweats or have a very high temperature (you feel hot and shivery) for more than 3 or 4 days
you have swollen glands and no other signs of illness or infection
you have swollen lymph glands just above or below your collar bone (the bone that runs from your breastbone to each of your shoulders)
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you have swollen glands and you're finding it very difficult to swallow
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Causes of swollen glands
Do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Swollen glands are:
often caused by common illnesses like colds, tonsillitis and ear or throat infections
sometimes caused by viral infections such as glandular fever
rarely caused by anything more serious, like cancer of the blood system (leukaemia) or lymph system (lymphoma)
A GP will be able to recommend treatment depending on the cause, which might include antibiotics (antibiotics do not work on viral infections).
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 25 September 2020
Next review due: 25 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright