Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Warts and verrucas
Warts and verrucas are small lumps on the skin that most people have at some point in their life. They usually go away on their own but may take months or even years.
Check if you have a wart or verruca
Warts feel firm and rough. They can appear on palms, knuckles, knees and fingers.
Credit:
Warts are usually skin coloured but may appear darker on dark skin.
Credit:
Verrucas appear on your feet. They have tiny black dots under the hard skin.
Credit:
Some warts are round, flat and can be yellow (plane warts). You can have many of them.
Credit:
Clusters of warts, spread over an area of skin (mosaic warts) are common on feet and hands.
Credit:
Warts do not cause you any harm, but some people find them itchy, painful or embarrassing. Verrucas are more likely to be painful – like standing on a needle.
You can treat warts if they bother you, keep coming back or are painful.
A pharmacist can help with warts and verrucas
You can buy creams, plasters and sprays from pharmacies to treat warts and verrucas.
These treatments can take up to 3 months to complete, may irritate your skin and do not always work. You should not use these treatments on your face.
Your pharmacist can give you advice about the best treatment for you.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you're worried about a growth on your skin
you have a wart or verruca that keeps coming back
you have a very large or painful wart or verruca
a wart bleeds or changes in how it looks
you have a wart on your face or genitals
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Information:
Genital warts can be treated at a sexual health or GUM clinic.
Find your nearest sexual health service
Treatment from a GP
A GP may be able to freeze a wart or verruca so it falls off a few weeks later. Sometimes it takes a few sessions.
Check with the GP if the NHS pays for this treatment in your area.
If treatment has not worked or you have a wart on your face, the GP might refer you to a skin specialist. Other treatments include minor surgery and treatment with laser or light.
How to stop warts and verrucas spreading
Warts and verrucas are caused by a virus. They can be spread to other people from contaminated surfaces or through close skin contact. You're more likely to spread a wart or verruca if your skin is wet or damaged.
It can take months for a wart or verruca to appear after contact with the virus.
Do
wash your hands after touching a wart or verruca
change your socks daily if you have a verruca
cover warts and verrucas with a plaster when swimming
take care not to cut a wart when shaving
Don’t
do not share towels, flannels, socks or shoes if you have a wart or verruca
do not bite your nails or suck fingers with warts on
do not walk barefoot in public places if you have a verruca
do not scratch or pick a wart
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 14 October 2020
Next review due: 14 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright