Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Anal pain
Anal pain (pain in the bottom) is common. There are things you can do to ease it, but see a GP if you're in a lot of pain or it does not get better.
Common causes of anal pain
Anal pain has many different causes.
Your symptoms might give you an idea of what is causing anal pain. Do not self-diagnose, see a GP if you're worried.
Common causes of anal pain and related symptoms.
Symptoms Possible cause
Pooing less than normal for you and pain when pooing Constipation
Itchy anus, feeling a lump around the anus, blood on the paper after wiping Piles (haemorrhoids)
Sharp pain when pooing, burning pain after doing a poo and blood on the paper after wiping Anal fissures
Constant throbbing pain, pus and blood on the paper after wiping, high temperature Anal fistulas and abscesses
Less often, anal pain can be caused by something else like a sexually transmitted infection (STI) or fungal infection. Rarely, it can be a sign of something serious like anal cancer.
How you can ease or prevent anal pain
Do
drink lots of fluid and eat plenty of fibre to keep your poo soft
exercise regularly
wipe your bottom with damp toilet paper
take paracetamol
take a warm bath to ease itching and pain
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) in a towel on the painful area for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
Don’t
do not scratch around your anus
do not ignore the urge to poo
do not push too hard when pooing
do not use fragranced products, such as shower gels or soaps around your anus
do not eat spicy food or drink alcohol and caffeine
do not lift or carry anything heavy
do not take ibuprofen if your anus is bleeding
A pharmacist can help with anal pain
A pharmacist can recommend medicines to reduce constipation and anal pain such as:
painkillers like ibuprofen or paracetamol
creams or suppositories (medicines you put into your bottom) to ease itching, pain and swelling
medicines that help make it easier to poo (laxatives)
Many pharmacies have private areas if you do not want to be overheard.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
anal pain is severe
the pain does not improve after a few days
you've had blood in your poo or bleeding from your bottom for 3 weeks
Do not feel embarrassed to see a GP. Anal pain is a common problem that they're used to treating.
What we mean by severe pain
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have severe anal pain and you have a high temperature or feel hot and shivery
your poo is black or dark red
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
What we mean by severe pain
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if:
you're bleeding non-stop from your bottom
there's a lot of blood coming from your bottom – for example, the toilet water turns red or you see large blood clots
Find your nearest A&E
Treatment for anal pain
Treatment for anal pain depends on what's causing it.
A GP will examine you and may prescribe:
a cream or ointment to ease your pain
laxatives to help you poo more easily
antibiotics if you have an infection
The GP may also recommend changes to your diet or arrange for tests to look for a cause of the anal pain.
Sometimes surgery or other treatments may be needed if the pain is caused by severe anal fissures, piles or fistulas.
Page last reviewed: 15 March 2022
Next review due: 15 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright