Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Broken nose
A broken nose usually heals on its own within 3 weeks. Get medical help if it's not getting better or your nose has changed shape.
Check if it's a broken nose
Symptoms of a broken nose may include:
pain, swelling and redness
a crunching or crackling sound when you touch your nose
difficulty breathing through your nose – it might feel blocked
your nose changing shape – for example, it's not as straight as before
You may also have:
Bruising under your eyes (black eyes)
Credit:
A cut on the bridge of your nose, or a nosebleed
Credit:
How to treat a broken nose yourself
You can usually treat a broken nose yourself. It should start getting better within 3 days and be fully healed within 3 weeks.
Do
hold an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a tea towel on your nose for up to 15 minutes, several times a day
take paracetamol to relieve pain
treat nosebleeds by sitting or standing upright and leaning forward – if possible, pinch your nose above the nostrils for up to 15 minutes
keep your head upright when lying in bed by adding more pillows – this will help to reduce swelling
read how to treat minor cuts and grazes – if you have a small cut on your nose
Don’t
do not try to straighten your nose yourself if it's changed shape – go to a minor injuries unit or see a GP instead
do not wear glasses until the swelling has gone down, unless you need them
do not pick or blow your nose until it's healed
do not do strenuous exercise for the first 2 weeks
do not play sports for at least 6 weeks if there's a chance your face might be hit
Non-urgent advice:
Go to a minor injuries unit or see a GP if:
your nose is crooked (not straight) after the injury
the swelling has not started to go down after 3 days
painkillers are not helping
you're still finding it difficult to breathe through your nose after the swelling has gone
you're having regular nosebleeds
you have a very high temperature (or you feel hot and shivery)
Find a minor injuries unit
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if you have a broken nose and:
a nosebleed that will not stop
a large cut or open wound on your nose or face, or something in the wound, such as glass
clear, watery fluid trickling from your nose – this could be a sign of a serious head injury
a severe headache with blurred or double vision
eye pain and double vision
neck pain or a stiff neck with numbness or tingling in your arms
a purple swelling inside your nose – it may be painful or block your breathing
other symptoms of a severe head injury – such as collapsing (passing out) or difficulty speaking
Treatment from a GP
A GP might prescribe stronger painkillers if paracetamol is not helping.
If you have a severe broken nose or it's changed shape, you may be referred to a specialist in hospital for assessment and treatment.
Treating a severe broken nose in hospital
If your nose has changed shape
A doctor in hospital may be able to make your nose straighter using a procedure called manipulation.
You might have to go home and wait a few days for the swelling to go down first, but the procedure should be done within 14 days of you breaking your nose.
Manipulation is done using anaesthetic so that you're asleep or your nose is numbed. It does not always make your nose look exactly the same as it was before, but it often helps.
If you have a large wound
The wound will usually be cleaned and sealed with stitches or strips in hospital.
If your nose will not stop bleeding
A doctor may place a soft gauze pad in your nose. The pad will be removed by the doctor a few days later.
Page last reviewed: 16 November 2020
Next review due: 16 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright