Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Cystoscopy
Contents
Overview
What happens
Recovery
Risks
A cystoscopy is a procedure to look inside the bladder using a thin camera called a cystoscope.
A cystoscope is inserted into the urethra (the tube that carries pee out of the body) and passed into the bladder to allow a doctor or nurse to see inside.
Small surgical instruments can also be passed down the cystoscope to treat some bladder problems at the same time.
Types of cystoscopy and how they're carried out
There are 2 types of cystoscopy:
flexible cystoscopy – a thin (about the width of a pencil), bendy cystoscope is used, and you stay awake while it's carried out
rigid cystoscopy – a slightly wider cystoscope that does not bend is used, and you're either put to sleep or the lower half of your body is numbed while it's carried out
Flexible cystoscopies tend to be done if the reason for the procedure is just to look inside your bladder. A rigid cystoscopy may be done if you need treatment for a problem in your bladder.
Anyone can have either type of cystoscopy. Ask your doctor or nurse which type you're going to have if you're not sure.
Read more about what happens during a cystoscopy.
Why cystoscopies are used
A cystoscopy can be used to look for and treat problems in the bladder or urethra.
For example, it can be used to:
check for the cause of problems such as blood in pee, frequent urinary tract infections (UTIs), problems peeing, and long-lasting pelvic pain
remove a sample of tissue for testing in a laboratory (a biopsy) to check for problems such as bladder cancer
carry out treatments, such as removing bladder stones, inserting or removing a stent (a small tube used to treat blockages), and injecting medicine into the bladder
Does a cystoscopy hurt?
A cystoscopy can be a bit uncomfortable, but it's not usually painful.
For a flexible cystoscopy, local anaesthetic gel is used to numb the urethra. This will reduce any discomfort when the cystoscope is inserted.
A rigid cystoscopy is carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're asleep) or a spinal anaesthetic (which numbs the lower half of your body), so you will not have any pain while it's carried out.
It's normal to have some discomfort when peeing after a cystoscopy, but this should pass in a few days.
Recovering from a cystoscopy
You should be able to get back to normal quite quickly after a cystoscopy.
You can usually leave hospital the same day and can return to your normal activities – including work, exercise, and having sex – as soon as you feel able to.
This may be later the same day if you had a flexible cystoscopy, or a couple of days after a rigid cystoscopy.
It's normal to have discomfort when peeing and a bit of blood in your pee for a day or two.
See a GP if the discomfort is severe or does not improve in a few days, or you develop a high temperature.
Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you feel really unwell.
Read more about recovering from a cystoscopy.
Risks of a cystoscopy
A cystoscopy is usually a very safe procedure and serious complications are rare.
The main risks are:
a urinary tract infection (UTI) – which may need to be treated with antibiotics
being unable to pee after going home – which may mean a thin tube called a catheter needs to be temporarily inserted into your bladder so you can empty your bladder
There's also a risk your bladder could be damaged by the cystoscope, but this is rare.
Speak to your doctor or nurse about the possible risks of the procedure before having it.
Read more about the risks of a cystoscopy.
Page last reviewed: 20 April 2020
Next review due: 20 April 2023
Next
:
What happens
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright