Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Cerebral palsy
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Cerebral palsy is the name for a group of lifelong conditions that affect movement and co-ordination. It's caused by a problem with the brain that develops before, during or soon after birth.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cerebral palsy from Scope
Symptoms of cerebral palsy
The symptoms of cerebral palsy are not usually obvious just after a baby is born. They normally become noticeable during the first 2 or 3 years of a child's life.
Symptoms can include:
delays in reaching development milestones – for example, not sitting by 8 months or not walking by 18 months
seeming too stiff or too floppy
weak arms or legs
fidgety, jerky or clumsy movements
random, uncontrolled movements
walking on tiptoes
a range of other problems – such as swallowing difficulties, speaking problems, vision problems and learning disabilities
The severity of symptoms can vary significantly. Some people only have minor problems, while others may be severely disabled.
Read more about the symptoms of cerebral palsy.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your health visitor or a GP if you have any concerns about your child's health or development.
Symptoms like those of cerebral palsy can have a number of different causes and are not necessarily a sign of anything serious.
Your child may be referred to specialists in child development who can do some checks and tests.
Read more about tests for cerebral palsy.
Causes of cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy can happen if a baby's brain does not develop normally while they're in the womb, or is damaged during or soon after birth.
Causes of cerebral palsy include:
bleeding in the baby's brain or reduced blood and oxygen supply to their brain
an infection caught by the mother during pregnancy
the brain temporarily not getting enough oxygen (asphyxiation) during a difficult birth
meningitis
a serious head injury
But in many cases, the exact cause is not clear. 
Read more about the causes of cerebral palsy.
Treatments for cerebral palsy
There's currently no cure for cerebral palsy, but treatments are available to help people with the condition be as active and independent as possible.
Treatments include:
physiotherapy – techniques such as exercise and stretching to help maintain physical ability and hopefully improve movement problems
speech therapy to help with speech and communication, and swallowing difficulties
occupational therapy – where a therapist identifies problems that you or your child have carrying out everyday tasks, and suggests ways to make these easier
medicine for muscle stiffness and other difficulties
in some cases, surgery to treat movement or growth problems
A team of healthcare professionals will work with you to come up with a treatment plan that meets your or your child's needs.
Read more about treatments for cerebral palsy.
Outlook for cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy affects each person differently and it can be difficult to predict what the outlook will be for you or your child.
Generally speaking:
most children live into adult life and some can live for many decades
the condition may limit your child's activities and independence, although many people go on to lead full, independent lives
many children go to a mainstream school, but some may have special educational needs and benefit from attending a special school
the original problem with the brain does not get worse over time, but the condition can put a lot of strain on the body and cause problems, such as painful joints, in later life
the daily challenges of living with cerebral palsy can be difficult to cope with, which can lead to problems such as depression in some people
Speak to your care team about the likely effects of cerebral palsy on you or your child.
Help and support
If you or your child have been diagnosed with cerebral palsy, you may find it useful to contact a support group for information and advice.
Scope is the main UK charity for people with cerebral palsy and their families. They offer:
advice and information for disabled people and their families
support services
an online community
a free telephone helpline: 0808 800 3333 (Monday to Friday 8am to 8pm, and Saturday and Sunday 10am to 6pm)
an email helpline: helpline@scope.org.uk
Your care team may also be able to provide details of support groups in your local area.
Video: cerebral palsy
In this video, a cerebal palsy expert explains the causes, symptoms and treatment.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 22 April 2020
Media review due: 22 April 2023
Page last reviewed: 13 February 2020
Next review due: 13 February 2023
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright