Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
High temperature (fever) in children
A high temperature is very common in young children. The temperature usually returns to normal within 3 or 4 days.
What is a high temperature?
Information:
A normal temperature in babies and children is about 36.4C, but this can vary slightly from child to child.
A high temperature is 38C or more.
A high temperature is the body's natural response to fighting infections like coughs and colds.
Many things can cause a high temperature in children, from common childhood illnesses like chickenpox and tonsillitis, to vaccinations.
Checking a high temperature
Your child might:
feel hotter than usual when you touch their back or chest
feel sweaty
look or feel unwell
Use a digital thermometer, which you can buy from pharmacies and supermarkets, to take your child's temperature.
How to take your child's temperature
What to do if your child has a high temperature
You can usually look after your child or baby at home. The temperature should go down over 3 or 4 days.
Do
give them plenty of fluids
look out for signs of dehydration
give them food if they want it
check on your child regularly during the night
keep them at home
give them paracetamol if they're distressed or unwell
get medical advice if you're worried about your child
Don’t
do not undress your child or sponge them down to cool them, a high temperature is a natural and healthy response to infection
do not cover them up in too many clothes or bedclothes
do not give aspirin to children under 16 years of age
do not combine ibuprofen and paracetamol, unless a GP tells you to
do not give paracetamol to a child under 2 months
do not give ibuprofen to a child under 3 months or under 5kg
do not give ibuprofen to children with asthma
Read more about giving medicines to children
Important:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
At the moment it can be hard to know what to do if your child is unwell. 
A high temperature can lead to a child being very unwell quickly. It's important to get medical help if you need it.
Urgent advice:
Call 111 or your GP surgery now if your child:
is under 3 months old and has a temperature of 38C or higher, or you think they have a high temperature
is 3 to 6 months old and has a temperature of 39C or higher, or you think they have a high temperature
has other signs of illness, such as a rash, as well as a high temperature
has a high temperature that's lasted for 5 days or more
does not want to eat, or is not their usual self and you're worried
has a high temperature that does not come down with paracetamol
is dehydrated – such as nappies that are not very wet, sunken eyes, and no tears when they're crying
Immediate action required:
Call 999 if your child:
has a stiff neck
has a rash that does not fade when you press a glass against it (use the "glass test" from Meningitis Now)
is bothered by light
has a fit (febrile seizure) for the first time (they cannot stop shaking)
has unusually cold hands and feet
has blue, pale or blotchy skin, lips or tongue
has a weak, high-pitched cry that's not like their normal cry
is drowsy and hard to wake
is extremely agitated (does not stop crying) or is confused
finds it hard to breathe and sucks their stomach in under their ribs
is not responding like they normally do, or is not interested in feeding or normal activities
Video: Caring for children with fever at home
Watch this video on how to help a child with fever recover as quickly as possible.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 June 2020
Media review due: 1 June 2023
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 21 December 2020
Next review due: 21 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright