Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Compartment syndrome
Compartment syndrome is a painful and potentially serious condition caused by bleeding or swelling within an enclosed bundle of muscles – known as a muscle compartment.
Credit:
Each group of muscles in the arms and legs, together with nearby blood vessels and nerves, is contained in a space surrounded by tissue called fascia.
Compartment syndrome occurs when the pressure within a compartment increases, restricting the blood flow to the area and potentially damaging the muscles and nearby nerves.
It usually occurs in the legs, feet, arms or hands, but can occur wherever there's an enclosed compartment inside the body.
Types of compartment syndrome
There are 2 main types of compartment syndrome: acute compartment syndrome and chronic (also called exertional) compartment syndrome.
Acute compartment syndrome:
happens suddenly, usually after a fracture or severe injury
is a medical emergency and requires urgent treatment
can lead to permanent muscle damage if not treated quickly
Chronic compartment syndrome:
happens gradually, usually during and immediately after repetitive exercise (such as running or cycling)
usually passes within minutes of stopping the activity
is not a medical emergency and does not cause permanent damage
Symptoms of compartment syndrome
Acute compartment syndrome
Symptoms of acute compartment syndrome usually develop after an injury and get quickly worse.
Symptoms can include:
intense pain, especially when the muscle is stretched, which seems much worse than would normally be expected for the injury
tenderness in the affected area
tightness in the muscle
a tingling or burning sensation
in severe cases, numbness or weakness (these are signs of permanent damage)
Chronic compartment syndrome
Symptoms of chronic compartment syndrome tend to develop gradually during exercise and improve with rest.
Symptoms can include:
cramping pain during exercise, most often in the legs
swelling or a visibly bulging muscle
a tingling sensation
the affected area turning pale and cold
in severe cases, difficulty moving the affected body part
When to get medical advice
It's important to get medical advice if you think you have compartment syndrome:
go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible if you think you have acute compartment syndrome
speak to your GP for advice if you think you have chronic compartment syndrome
Acute compartment syndrome is a medical emergency and ideally needs to be treated in hospital within a few hours to avoid permanent damage to the muscles or nerves.
Chronic compartment syndrome is much less serious, but it's a good idea to get your symptoms checked out and have the cause diagnosed.
Causes of compartment syndrome
Acute compartment syndrome
Acute compartment syndrome can be caused by:
a broken bone or a crush injury – this is the most common cause
a plaster cast or tight bandage being applied to a limb before it has stopped swelling
burns, which can cause the skin to become scarred and tight
surgery to repair a damaged or blocked blood vessel (once blood is able to flow back into a muscle, it can lead to swelling)
In rare cases, it can occur without any obvious injury.
Chronic compartment syndrome
Chronic compartment syndrome usually occurs in young people who do regular repetitive exercise, such as running or cycling.
The exact cause is unknown.
A leading theory is that it's caused by temporary swelling of the muscles during exercise affecting the blood supply to a whole group of muscles.
Treatments for compartment syndrome
Acute compartment syndrome
Acute compartment syndrome must be treated in hospital using a surgical procedure called an emergency fasciotomy.
The doctor or surgeon makes an incision to cut open your skin and fascia surrounding the muscles to immediately relieve the pressure inside the muscle compartment.
The wound will usually be closed a few days later. Occasionally, a skin graft may be required to cover the wound.
Chronic compartment syndrome
Chronic compartment syndrome is not usually dangerous, and can sometimes be relieved by stopping the exercise that triggers it and switching to a less strenuous activity.
Physiotherapy, shoe inserts (orthotics) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines may help – speak to your GP about this.
Surgery will only be considered if your symptoms persist despite these measures. In these cases, you'll go on a waiting list, as chronic compartment syndrome is not a medical emergency.
Page last reviewed: 17 September 2019
Next review due: 17 September 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright