Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Ankylosing spondylitis
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a long-term condition in which the spine and other areas of the body become inflamed.
AS tends to first develop in teenagers and young adults. It's also around 2 times more common in men than in women.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) advice
Get advice about COVID-19 and ankylosing spondylitis from the National Axial Spondyloarthritis Society
Symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis
The symptoms of AS can vary, but usually involve:
back pain and stiffness
pain and swelling in other parts of the body – caused by inflammation of the joints (arthritis) and inflammation where a tendon joins a bone (enthesitis)
extreme tiredness (fatigue)
These symptoms tend to develop gradually, usually over several months or years, and may come and go over time.
In some people the condition gets better with time, but for others it can get slowly worse.
Read about symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis.
When to seek medical advice
You should see your GP if you have persistent symptoms of AS.
If your GP thinks you may have the condition, they should refer you to a specialist in conditions affecting muscles and joints (rheumatologist) for further tests and any necessary treatment.
Further tests may include blood tests and imaging tests.
Read about diagnosing ankylosing spondylitis.
Causes of ankylosing spondylitis
It's not known what causes the condition, but there's thought to be a link with a particular gene known as HLA-B27.
Read about the causes of ankylosing spondylitis.
Treating ankylosing spondylitis
There's no cure for AS and it's not possible to reverse the damage caused by the condition. However, treatment is available to relieve the symptoms and help prevent or delay its progression.
In most cases treatment involves a combination of:
exercises carried out individually or in groups to reduce pain and stiffness
physiotherapy – where physical methods, such as massage and manipulation, are used to improve comfort and spinal flexibility
medicine to help relieve pain and reduce inflammation– such as painkillers, anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) medication and other forms of biological therapy
Surgery is sometimes needed to repair significantly damaged joints or correct severe bends in the spine, but this is uncommon.
Read about treating ankylosing spondylitis.
Complications of ankylosing spondylitis
The outlook for AS is highly variable. For some people the condition improves after an initial period of inflammation, whereas for others it can get progressively worse over time.
Some people with AS are able to remain fully independent or minimally disabled in the long-term.
However, some people eventually become severely disabled as a result of the bones in their spine fusing in a fixed position and damage to other joints, such as the hips or knees.
With modern treatments, AS does not normally affect life expectancy significantly, although the condition is associated with an increased risk of other potentially life-threatening problems.
For example, AS can lead to:
weakening of the bones (osteoporosis)
spinal fractures
cardiovascular disease – a group of conditions affecting the heart and blood vessels
chest infections
rarely, kidney disease
Read about the complications of ankylosing spondylitis.
Living with AS
The National Axial Spondyloarthritis Society (NASS) has information on living with ankylosing spondylitis, including advice on working, travelling and driving.
Video: back stretches
In this video, a physiotherapist shows some simple back stretches to help prevent aches and pains.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 16 November 2020
Media review due: 16 November 2023
See exercise video safety information
Page last reviewed: 11 July 2019
Next review due: 11 July 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright