Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Plantar fasciitis
Plantar fasciitis is pain on the bottom of your foot, around your heel and arch. You can usually ease the pain yourself but see a GP if it does not improve within 2 weeks.
Check if you have plantar fasciitis
The main symptom of plantar fasciitis is pain on the bottom of your foot, around your heel and arch.
Credit:
It's more likely to be plantar fasciitis if:
the pain is much worse when you start walking after sleeping or resting
the pain feels better during exercise, but returns after resting
it's difficult to raise your toes off the floor
How to ease plantar fasciitis yourself
If you see a GP, they'll usually suggest you try these things:
Do
rest and raise your foot on a stool when you can
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) in a towel on the painful area for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
wear shoes with cushioned heels and good arch support
use insoles or heel pads in your shoes
try regular gentle stretching exercises
try exercises that do not put pressure on your feet, such as swimming
take painkillers like paracetamol and ibuprofen
try to lose weight if you’re overweight
Don’t
do not take ibuprofen for the first 48 hours
do not walk or stand for long periods
do not wear high heels or tight pointy shoes
do not wear flip-flops or backless slippers
try not to walk barefoot on hard surfaces
A pharmacist can help with plantar fasciitis
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take
insoles and pads for your shoes
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have pain in the bottom of your foot that is severe or stopping you doing normal activities
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it yourself for 2 weeks
you have any tingling or loss of feeling in your foot
you have diabetes and foot pain – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
What we mean by severe pain
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for plantar fasciitis from a foot specialist
If plantar fasciitis does not get better, a GP might refer you to a physiotherapist or foot specialist (podiatrist).
A physiotherapist can show you exercises to help ease your symptoms. A podiatrist can recommend things like insoles and the right shoes to wear.
Physiotherapy is available free of charge on the NHS throughout the UK but waiting times can sometimes be long.
Depending on where you live, you may be able to self-refer or you may need to visit a GP or consultant first.
Podiatry may not be available for free on the NHS everywhere and waiting times can sometimes be long.
You can also pay to see a podiatrist or physiotherapist privately.
Find a registered podiatrist
Find a registered physiotherapist
Read more about accessing physiotherapy.
Common causes of plantar fasciitis
Plantar fasciitis is caused by straining the part of your foot that connects your heel bone to your toes (plantar fascia).
It's not always clear why this happens.
You may be more likely to get plantar fasciitis if you:
are 40 to 60 years of age
recently started exercising on hard surfaces
exercise with a tight calf or heel
overstretch the sole of your foot during exercise
recently started doing a lot more walking, running or standing up
wear shoes with poor cushioning or support
are very overweight
Page last reviewed: 07 February 2022
Next review due: 07 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright