Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Heart block
Heart block is a condition where the heart beats more slowly or with an abnormal rhythm. It's caused by a problem with the electrical pulses that control how your heart beats.
On this page we talk about atrioventricular (AV) heart block. Find out more about other types of heart block from the British Heart Foundation.
Symptoms depend on how severe your heart block is. The least serious is 1st-degree heart block, which may not cause any symptoms.
2nd-degree heart block sometimes causes troublesome symptoms that need treatment.
3rd-degree heart block is the most serious and can sometimes be a medical emergency.
All degrees of heart block can increase your risk of developing other heart rhythm problems, such as atrial fibrillation (an irregular and abnormally fast heart rate).
Symptoms of heart block
1st-degree heart block
1st-degree heart block does not usually cause any symptoms. Most people only find out they have it when they're tested for an unrelated medical condition.
2nd-degree heart block
Most people with the less serious type of 2nd-degree heart block, known as Mobitz type 1, do not have any symptoms. But some people may feel:
lightheaded or dizzy
faint
People with the more serious type of 2nd-degree heart block, known as Mobitz type 2 heart block, are more likely to have Mobitz type 1 symptoms as well as:
chest pain
shortness of breath
feeling very dizzy suddenly when standing up from a lying or sitting position – this is caused by having low blood pressure (hypotension)
3rd-degree heart block
Symptoms of 3rd-degree or complete heart block include:
feeling faint
being short of breath
extreme tiredness, sometimes with confusion
chest pain
Call 999 if your symptoms are severe or come on very quickly. These symptoms can be life threatening.
Causes of heart block
Some people are born with heart block – known as congenital heart block.
But more commonly, heart block develops later in life. This is known as acquired heart block and can be caused by:
other heart conditions, such as a heart attack
some prescription medicines
other conditions, such as Lyme disease
having heart surgery
Babies are more likely to have congenital heart block if they're born with a heart defect, or if their mother has an autoimmune condition, such as lupus.
Treatment of heart block
Heart block normally only needs to be treated if it's causing symptoms.
Depending on the cause of heart block and your symptoms, you may need to have a small device called a pacemaker fitted in your chest. A pacemaker is a small battery-operated device inserted under the skin of your chest. It sends frequent electrical pulses to keep your heart beating regularly.
Read more about how a pacemaker is fitted
Treatment for heart block usually works well. Most people live a normal active life with a pacemaker.
Diagnosing heart block
Unless you're experiencing symptoms, heart block is often diagnosed during routine tests for other conditions.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is the main test used to diagnose heart block. It measures the electrical activity of your heart.
An ECG can be carried out at rest or while you're exercising. Your doctor may ask you to wear a portable ECG monitor to get a reading over time. It provides a useful overall assessment of how well your heart is working.
The results of an ECG can also sometimes indicate the type of heart block you have.
Page last reviewed: 26 August 2020
Next review due: 26 August 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright