Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Molar pregnancy
A molar pregnancy is when there's a problem with a fertilised egg, which means a baby and a placenta do not develop the way they should after conception. A molar pregnancy will not be able to survive.
It happens by chance and is very rare. If you have a molar pregnancy, there is support available to help you.
Finding out you have a molar pregnancy
You may find out during your 1st pregnancy ultrasound scan at around 8 to 14 weeks.
Some people find out after their pregnancy ends with a miscarriage.
Finding out you have a molar pregnancy can be very difficult. A doctor or midwife can give you advice about the support that's available.
Urgent advice:
Call a midwife or GP if:
You're pregnant and:
you have any bleeding or a dark discharge from your vagina
you're feeling or being sick often (severe morning sickness)
you think your bump looks bigger than it should for your stage of pregnancy
you have any other symptoms you're worried about
What happens next
If a midwife or doctor thinks you have a molar pregnancy, you'll need:
blood tests to check your level of the pregnancy hormone hCG, which is usually higher than normal in a molar pregnancy
an ultrasound scan
an appointment with a specialist (gynaecologist) or at an early pregnancy assessment unit
Treatment for a molar pregnancy
A molar pregnancy will not be able to survive.
It may end on its own, with a miscarriage.
If this does not happen, it's usually treated with a procedure to remove the pregnancy.
You'll usually be given a general anaesthetic before the procedure, so you'll be asleep.
Sometimes you might be able to take medicine to end a molar pregnancy.
Follow-up care
After treatment for a molar pregnancy you'll have regular blood and urine tests to check your hCG hormone level is returning to normal.
If your hormone level does not return to normal you will need further treatment.
Sex, contraception, and trying for a baby after a molar pregnancy
You can have sex as soon as you feel ready, but it's important to use contraception while you're getting follow-up care. Talk to a GP about what type of contraception is right for you.
Having a molar pregnancy does not affect your chances of getting pregnant again. But it's important to wait until your doctor tells you it's safe before you start trying for a baby.
Causes of a molar pregnancy
A molar pregnancy happens by chance. It's not caused by either parent doing something wrong.
You may be more likely to have a molar pregnancy if:
you're a young teenager or older than 45 when you get pregnant
you've had a molar pregnancy before
you have an Asian background
Types of molar pregnancy
A molar pregnancy is sometimes called a hydatidiform mole.
There are 2 types of molar pregnancy:
a complete molar pregnancy – this is where abnormal cells grow in the womb after conception and there's no sign of a baby
a partial molar pregnancy – this is where there may be early signs of a baby, but it cannot fully develop or survive
Where to get support
It can take time to recover after a molar pregnancy, both physically and emotionally.
The specialists looking after you can give you advice if you need support. They may be able to recommend support services in your area.
You can also get more information and support from:
Molar Pregnancy Support & Information
Miscarriage Association
Tommy's: Molar pregnancy – information and support
Charing Cross Hospital Trophoblast Disease Service
Page last reviewed: 10 September 2020
Next review due: 10 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright