Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Perforated eardrum
Contents
Overview
Surgery
A perforated or burst eardrum is a hole in the eardrum. It'll usually heal within a few weeks and might not need any treatment.
But it's a good idea to see a GP if you think your eardrum has burst, as it can cause problems such as ear infections.
Symptoms of a perforated eardrum
Signs of a perforated eardrum, or an ear infection caused by a perforated eardrum, include:
sudden hearing loss – you may find it difficult to hear anything or your hearing may just be slightly muffled
earache or pain in your ear
itching in your ear
fluid leaking from your ear
a high temperature
ringing or buzzing in your ear (tinnitus)
The symptoms will usually pass once your eardrum has healed or any infection has been treated.
When to see a GP
See a GP if:
you think you have a perforated eardrum
you have already seen a GP and your symptoms are not any better after a few weeks or you get new symptoms (such as earache, a fever, itching or fluid leaking from your ear)
Your eardrum will usually heal without treatment, but a GP can check for an infection (which may need treatment) and talk to you about how you can look after your ear.
They'll look into your ear using a small handheld torch with a magnifying lens. The tip of this goes into your ear, but it only goes in a little way and should not hurt.
Things you can do if you have a perforated eardrum
Perforated eardrums do not always need to be treated because they often get better by themselves within a few weeks.
While it heals, the following tips can help you relieve your symptoms and reduce the chances of your ear becoming infected:
do not put anything in your ear, such as cotton buds or eardrops (unless a doctor recommends them)
do not get water in your ear – do not go swimming and be extra careful when showering or washing your hair
try not to blow your nose too hard, as this can damage your eardrum as it heals
hold a warm flannel against your ear to help reduce any pain
take painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve pain if you need to (do not give aspirin to children under 16)
Treatments for a perforated eardrum
If you have an ear infection caused by a perforated eardrum, a GP may prescribe antibiotics.
If the hole in your eardrum is big, or does not heal in a few weeks, the GP may refer you to an ear specialist to talk about having surgery to repair a perforated eardrum.
Causes of a perforated eardrum
A hole in the eardrum can be caused by:
an ear infection
an injury to the eardrum, such as a blow to your ear or poking an object like a cotton bud deep into your ear
changes in pressure, such as while flying or scuba diving
a sudden loud noise, such as an explosion
The following tips may help you avoid damaging your eardrum:
see a GP for treatment if you have symptoms of an ear infection for more than 2 or 3 days
do not push anything deep into your ears, including your fingers
wear suitable ear protection if you're often exposed to loud noises
when flying, try swallowing, yawning, chewing gum or sucking on a boiled sweet during take-off and landing
Find out more about flying if you have a perforated eardrum
Page last reviewed: 11 February 2020
Next review due: 11 February 2023
Next
:
Surgery
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright