Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Cystitis
Cystitis is a urinary tract infection (UTI) that affects the bladder. It's common, particularly in women. It often gets better by itself, but may sometimes be treated with antibiotics.
Some people get cystitis frequently and may need regular or long-term treatment.
Check if it's cystitis
Symptoms of cystitis include:
pain, burning or stinging when you pee
needing to pee more often and urgently than usual
pee that's dark, cloudy or strong smelling
pain low down in your tummy
Symptoms in young children may also include:
a high temperature – they feel hotter than usual if you touch their neck, back or tummy
wetting themselves
reduced appetite and being sick
weakness and irritability
In older, frail people with cognitive impairment (such as dementia) and people with a urinary catheter, symptoms may also include:
changes in behaviour, such as acting confused or agitated (delirium)
wetting themselves more than usual
shivering or shaking (rigors)
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you think you have cystitis and your symptoms have not gone away within 3 days
your symptoms have not gone away after treatment with antibiotics
you have severe cystitis symptoms, such as severe pain in your lower tummy
you get cystitis symptoms frequently
you have symptoms of cystitis and you're pregnant or you're a man
your child has symptoms of cystitis
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
You think you or someone else has cystitis and:
a high temperature, or feeling hot and shivery
a low temperature, or shaking and shivering
pain in the lower tummy or in the back, just under the ribs
are confused, drowsy or have difficulty speaking
are feeling or being sick
have not had a pee all day
blood in your pee
These symptoms could mean you have a kidney infection, which can be serious if it’s not treated as it could cause sepsis.
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Treatment from a GP
If you have cystitis, a GP may:
offer self-care advice and recommend taking a painkiller
do a urine test, although this is not always needed
give you a prescription for a 3-day course of antibiotics
give you a prescription for antibiotics but suggest you wait for 48 hours before taking them, in case your symptoms go away on their own
Treatment for cystitis that keeps coming back
If you keep getting cystitis, a GP may prescribe:
a single-dose antibiotic to take within 2 hours of having sex, if you've noticed sex triggers cystitis
a low-dose antibiotic to take for up to 6 months
a vaginal oestrogen cream, if you have gone through the menopause
In some women, antibiotics do not work or urine tests do not pick up an infection even though you have cystitis symptoms.
This may mean you have a long-term (chronic) bladder infection that is not picked up by current urine tests. Ask the GP for a referral to a specialist for further tests and treatment.
Long-term infections are linked to an increased risk of bladder cancer in people aged 60 and over.
Things you can try yourself
If you have mild symptoms of cystitis, it can help to:
take paracetamol up to 4 times a day to reduce pain
give children liquid paracetamol – follow the instructions on the bottle
drink plenty of water
hold a hot water bottle over your lower tummy
avoid having sex
avoid drinks that may irritate your bladder, like fruit juices, coffee and alcohol
pee frequently
Some people take cystitis sachets or cranberry drinks and products. But there’s no evidence they help ease symptoms of cystitis.
A pharmacist can help with cystitis
You can ask a pharmacist about treatments for cystitis. A pharmacist can:
offer advice on things that can help you get better
suggest the best painkiller to take
tell you if you need to see a GP about your symptoms
Some pharmacies offer a cystitis management service. They may be able to give antibiotics if they're needed.
Find a pharmacy
Causes of cystitis
Cystitis is usually caused by bacteria from poo getting into the tube that carries urine out of your body (urethra).
Women have a shorter urethra than men. This means bacteria are more likely to reach the bladder and cause an infection.
Things that increase the chance of bacteria getting into the bladder include:
having sex
wiping your bottom from back to front after going to the toilet
urinary catheters (a tube in your bladder used to drain urine)
using spermicide with contraception
conditions that block the urinary tract, such as kidney stones
being pregnant
conditions that make it difficult to fully empty the bladder, such as an enlarged prostate gland in men
having been through the menopause
having diabetes
having a weakened immune system
How to prevent cystitis
If you get cystitis frequently, there are some things you can try to help prevent it returning.
Do
wipe from front to back when you go to the toilet
pee as soon as possible after sex
drink plenty of fluids, especially water – so that you pee regularly during the day and do not feel thirsty
have a shower rather than a bath – this stops exposing your genitals to cleaning products for too long
wash the skin around the vagina with water before and after sex
change soiled nappies or incontinence pads promptly
keep the genital area clean and dry
Don’t
do not use scented soap, bubble bath or talcum powder
do not use spermicide with diaphragm or condoms – try non-spermicidal lube or different type of contraception
do not hold your pee in if you feel the urge to go
do not rush when going for a pee – try to fully empty your bladder
do not drink lots of alcoholic drinks or coffee – they may irritate your bladder
do not have lots of sugary foods or drinks – they may encourage bacteria to grow
Other ways to prevent cystitis coming back
If you have been through the menopause and keep getting cystitis, there is some evidence you may find it helpful to take:
D-mannose – a sugar you can buy as a powder or tablets to take every day
cranberry products – available as juice, tablets or capsules to take every day
Be aware that D-mannose and cranberry products can contain a lot of sugar. If you're taking warfarin, you should avoid cranberry products.
Page last reviewed: 11 February 2022
Next review due: 11 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright