Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Itchy skin
Itchy skin is not usually a sign of anything serious. You can often treat it yourself and it will usually go away after a few weeks.
How to treat itchy skin yourself
Sometimes itching is caused by dry, cracked or irritated skin. There are simple things you can do to help ease the itching.
These things may also help stop itchy skin returning and avoid skin damage from scratching.
Do
pat or tap your skin instead of scratching it
hold something cool on your skin, like a damp towel
have cool or warm baths or showers
use an unperfumed moisturiser or emollient regularly
keep your nails clean, short and smooth
wear loose cotton clothing
use a laundry liquid or powder that's for sensitive skin
Don’t
do not wear tight clothes, or clothes made from wool or synthetic fabrics
do not spend a long time in the bath or shower
do not use perfumed soaps, deodorants or moisturisers
A pharmacist can help with itchy skin
A pharmacist can recommend the best products to help with itchy skin. For example, creams, lotions or a medicine called antihistamine.
Tell them where your skin is itchy and if you have any other symptoms.
A pharmacist might also be able to tell you:
what you can do to treat it yourself
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if itchy skin:
is affecting your daily life
does not get better with self-care or it keeps coming back
is caused by a new rash, lump or swelling that you're worried about
is all over your body; this could be a sign of something more serious
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
A GP might prescribe creams, lotions or tablets, depending on what's causing the itching.
They will look at your skin and ask about your symptoms.
The GP might arrange a blood test, or wipe a cotton bud over the area of itchy skin (a swab), or gently scrape off some skin cells, so they can be tested. This can help find the cause of your itchy skin.
A GP may also refer you to see a doctor who specialises in skin problems (dermatologist).
Causes of itchy skin
Itchy skin has many possible causes. If you have other symptoms (such as a rash or swelling) this might help to find the cause.
But do not try to diagnose yourself. See a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes
Possible causes Common skin conditions
Skin reactions to heat or something you're allergic to allergies, hives, prickly heat
Long-term skin conditions dandruff, eczema, psoriasis
Fungal skin infections thrush, ringworm, athlete's foot
Parasites or insects living on the skin scabies, head lice, pubic lice
Itchy skin is also common during pregnancy or after the menopause. This is caused by hormonal changes and usually gets better over time.
In rare cases, itchy skin can be a sign of a more serious condition, such as thyroid, liver or kidney problems.
Page last reviewed: 10 July 2020
Next review due: 10 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright