Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Acute kidney injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is where your kidneys suddenly stop working properly. It can range from minor loss of kidney function to complete kidney failure.
AKI normally happens as a complication of another serious illness. It's not the result of a physical blow to the kidneys, as the name might suggest.
This type of kidney damage is usually seen in older people who are unwell with other conditions and the kidneys are also affected.
It's essential that AKI is detected early and treated promptly.
Without quick treatment, abnormal levels of salts and chemicals can build up in the body, which affects the ability of other organs to work properly. 
If the kidneys shut down completely, this may require temporary support from a dialysis machine, or lead to death.
Symptoms of acute kidney injury
Symptoms of AKI include:
feeling sick or being sick
diarrhoea
dehydration
peeing less than usual
confusion
drowsiness
Even if it does not progress to complete kidney failure, AKI needs to be taken seriously.
It has an effect on the whole body, changes how some drugs are handled by the body, and could make some existing illnesses more serious.
AKI is different from chronic kidney disease, where the kidneys gradually lose function over a long period of time.
Who's at risk of acute kidney injury?
You're more likely to get AKI if:
you're aged 65 or over
you already have a kidney problem, such as chronic kidney disease
you have a long-term disease, such as heart failure, liver disease or diabetes
you're dehydrated or unable to maintain your fluid intake independently
you have a blockage in your urinary tract (or are at risk of this)
you have a severe infection or sepsis
you're taking certain medicines, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS, such as ibuprofen) or blood pressure drugs, such as ACE inhibitors or diuretics; diuretics are usually beneficial to the kidneys, but may become less helpful when a person is dehydrated or suffering from a severe illness
you're given aminoglycosides – a type of antibiotic; again, this is only an issue if the person is dehydrated or ill, and these are usually only given in a hospital setting
Causes of acute kidney injury
Most cases of AKI are caused by reduced blood flow to the kidneys, usually in someone who's already unwell with another health condition.
This reduced blood flow could be caused by:
low blood volume after bleeding, excessive vomiting or diarrhoea, or severe dehydration
the heart pumping out less blood than normal as a result of heart failure, liver failure or sepsis
problems with the blood vessels – such as inflammation and blockage in the blood vessels within the kidneys (a rare condition called vasculitis)
certain medicines that can affect the blood supply to the kidney – other medicines may cause unusual reactions in the kidney itself
AKI can also be caused by a problem with the kidney itself, such as glomerulonephritis.
This may be caused by a reaction to some drugs, infections or the liquid dye used in some types of X-rays.
It may also be the result of a blockage affecting the drainage of the kidneys, such as:
an enlarged prostate
a tumour in the pelvis, such as an ovarian or bladder tumour
kidney stones
Diagnosing acute kidney injury
A doctor may suspect AKI if you're:
in an "at risk" group and suddenly fall ill
get symptoms of AKI
AKI is usually diagnosed with a blood test to measure your levels of creatinine, a chemical waste product produced by the muscles.
If there's a lot of creatinine in your blood, it means your kidneys are not working as well as they should.
You may also be asked to give a pee sample and an ultrasound scan of your kidneys may be done to look for any blockages.
Find out more about AKI in children
Investigating the underlying cause
Urine can be tested for protein, blood cells, sugar and waste products, which may give clues to the underlying cause.
Doctors also need to know about:
any other symptoms, such as signs of sepsis or signs of heart failure
any other medical conditions
any medication that's been taken in the past week, as some medicines can cause AKI
An ultrasound scan should reveal if the cause is a blockage in the urinary system, such as an enlarged prostate or bladder tumour.
Treating acute kidney injury
Treatment of AKI depends on what's causing your illness and how severe it is.
You may need:
to increase your intake of water and other fluids if you're dehydrated
antibiotics if you have an infection
to stop taking certain medicines (at least until the problem is sorted)
a urinary catheter, a thin tube used to drain the bladder if there's a blockage
You may need to go to hospital for some treatments.
Most people with AKI make a full recovery, but some people go on to develop chronic kidney disease or long-term kidney failure as a result.
In severe cases, dialysis, where a machine filters the blood to rid the body of harmful waste, extra salt and water, may be needed.
Preventing acute kidney injury
Those at risk of AKI should be monitored with regular blood tests if they become unwell or start new medication. 
It's also useful to check how much urine you're passing.
Any warning signs of AKI, such as vomiting or producing little urine, require immediate investigation for AKI and treatment.
People who are dehydrated or at risk of dehydration may need to be given fluids through a drip.
Any medicine that seems to be making the problem worse or directly damaging the kidneys needs to be stopped, at least temporarily.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has produced detailed guidelines on preventing, detecting and managing AKI.
Read the NICE guidelines
Complications of acute kidney injury
The most serious complications of acute kidney injury are:
high levels of potassium in the blood – in severe cases, this can lead to muscle weakness, paralysis and heart rhythm problems
fluid in the lungs (pulmonary oedema)
acidic blood (metabolic acidosis) – which can cause nausea, vomiting, drowsiness and breathlessness
Page last reviewed: 25 February 2019
Next review due: 25 February 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright