Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Hepatitis A
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Treatment
Vaccination
Hepatitis A is a liver infection caused by a virus that's spread in the poo of an infected person.
It's uncommon in the UK, but certain groups are at increased risk. This includes travellers to parts of the world with poor levels of sanitation, men who have sex with men, and people who inject drugs.
Hepatitis A can be unpleasant, but it's not usually serious and most people make a full recovery within a couple of months.
Some people, particularly young children, may not have any symptoms.
But hepatitis A can occasionally last for many months and, in rare cases, it can be life threatening if it causes the liver to stop working properly (liver failure).
A hepatitis A vaccine is available for people at high risk of infection.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and liver disease from the British Liver Trust
Symptoms of hepatitis A
The symptoms of hepatitis A develop, on average, around 4 weeks after becoming infected, although not everyone will get them.
Symptoms can include:
feeling tired and generally unwell
joint and muscle pain
a raised temperature
loss of appetite
feeling or being sick
pain in the upper right part of your tummy
yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice)
dark pee and pale poo
itchy skin
The symptoms will usually pass within a couple of months.
Find out more about the symptoms of hepatitis A
When to get medical advice
See your GP for advice if:
you have symptoms of hepatitis A – a blood test can usually confirm whether you have the infection
you might have been exposed to the hepatitis A virus recently but you do not have any symptoms – treatment given early on may be able to stop the infection developing
you think you might need the hepatitis A vaccine – your GP can advise you about whether you should have the vaccine
Although hepatitis A is not usually serious, it's important to see your GP so they can rule out more serious conditions with similar symptoms, such as hepatitis C or scarring of ther liver (cirrhosis).
It may also be necessary to test your friends, family and any sexual partners in case you have spread the infection to them.
How you can get hepatitis A
Hepatitis A is most widespread in parts of the world where standards of sanitation and food hygiene are generally poor, such as parts of Africa, the Indian subcontinent, the Far East, the Middle East, and Central and South America.
You can get the infection from:
eating food prepared by someone with the infection who has not washed their hands properly or washed them in water contaminated with sewage
drinking contaminated water, including ice cubes
eating raw or undercooked shellfish from contaminated water
close contact with someone who has hepatitis A
less commonly, having sex with someone with hepatitis A (this is particularly a risk for men who have sex with men) or injecting drugs using contaminated equipment
Someone with hepatitis A is most infectious from around 2 weeks before symptoms appear until about a week after symptoms first develop.
Find out more about the causes of hepatitis A
Vaccination against hepatitis A
Vaccination against hepatitis A is not routinely offered in the UK because the risk of infection is low for most people.
It's only recommended for people at an increased risk, including:
close contacts of someone with hepatitis A
people planning to travel to or live in parts of the world where hepatitis A is widespread, particularly if sanitation and food hygiene are expected to be poor
people with any type of long-term liver disease
men who have sex with other men
people who inject illegal drugs
people who may be exposed to hepatitis A through their job – this includes sewage workers, people who work for organisations where personal hygiene may be poor, such as a homeless shelter, and people working with monkeys, apes and gorillas
The hepatitis A vaccine is usually available for free on the NHS for anyone who needs it.
Find out more about the hepatitis A vaccine
Treatments for hepatitis A
There's currently no cure for hepatitis A. But it usually gets better on its own within a couple of months. You can usually look after yourself at home.
While you're ill, it's a good idea to:
get plenty of rest
take painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, for any aches and pains – ask your GP for advice about this, as you may need to take lower doses than normal or avoid certain medications until you have recovered
maintain a cool, well-ventilated environment, wear loose clothing and avoid hot baths or showers to reduce any itching
eat small, light meals to help reduce nausea and vomiting
avoid alcohol to reduce the strain on your liver
stay off work or school and avoid having sex until at least a week after your jaundice or other symptoms started
practise good hygiene, such as washing your hands with soap and water regularly
Speak to your GP if your symptoms are particularly troublesome or have not started to improve within a couple of months.
They can prescribe medications to help with itchiness, nausea or vomiting, if necessary.
Find out more about treating hepatitis A
Outlook
For most people, hepatitis A gets better within 2 months and there are no long-term effects.
Once it passes, you normally develop life-long immunity against the virus.
In around 1 in every 7 people with the infection, the symptoms may come and go for up to 6 months before eventually disappearing.
Life-threatening complications such as liver failure are rare, affecting less than 1 in every 250 people with hepatitis A.
People most at risk include the elderly and those with pre-existing liver problems.
If you have hepatitis A and liver failure, you'll usually need a liver transplant.
Page last reviewed: 11 March 2019
Next review due: 11 March 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright