Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Ear infections
Ear infections are very common, particularly in children. You do not always need to see a GP for an ear infection as they often get better on their own within 3 days.
Check if it's an ear infection
The symptoms of an ear infection usually start quickly and include:
pain inside the ear
a high temperature
being sick
a lack of energy
difficulty hearing
discharge running out of the ear
a feeling of pressure or fullness inside the ear
itching and irritation in and around the ear
scaly skin in and around the ear
Young children and babies with an ear infection may also:
rub or pull their ear
not react to some sounds
be irritable or restless
be off their food
keep losing their balance
Most ear infections clear up within 3 days, although sometimes symptoms can last up to a week.
Differences between inner, middle and outer ear infections
How to treat an ear infection yourself
To help relieve any pain and discomfort from an ear infection:
Do
use painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen (children under 16 should not take aspirin)
place a warm or cold flannel on the ear
remove any discharge by wiping the ear with cotton wool
Don’t
do not put anything inside your ear to remove earwax, such as cotton buds or your finger
do not let water or shampoo get in your ear
do not use decongestants or antihistamines – there's no evidence they help with ear infections
A pharmacist can help with an ear infection
Speak to a pharmacist if you think you have an outer ear infection.
They can recommend acidic eardrops to help stop bacteria or fungus spreading.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you or your child have:
a very high temperature or feel hot and shivery
earache that does not start to get better after 3 days
swelling around the ear
fluid coming from the ear
hearing loss or a change in hearing
other symptoms, like being sick, a severe sore throat or dizziness
regular ear infections
a long-term medical condition – such as diabetes or a heart, lung, kidney or neurological disease
a weakened immune system – because of chemotherapy, for example
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will often use a small light (an otoscope) to look in the ear.
Some otoscopes blow a small puff of air into the ear. This checks for blockages, which could be a sign of an infection.
Treatment from a GP
The GP may prescribe medicine for your ear infection, depending on what's caused it.
Infections inside the ear
Antibiotics are not usually offered because infections inside the ear often clear up on their own and antibiotics make little difference to symptoms, including pain.
Antibiotics might be prescribed if:
an ear infection does not start to get better after 3 days
you or your child has any fluid coming out of the ear
you or your child has an illness that means there's a risk of complications, such as cystic fibrosis
They may also be prescribed if your child is less than 2 years old and has an infection in both ears.
Outer ear infections
The GP might prescribe:
antibiotic eardrops – to treat a bacterial infection
steroid eardrops – to bring down swelling
antifungal eardrops – to treat a fungal infection
antibiotic tablets – if your bacterial infection is severe
If you have a spot or boil in your ear, the GP may pierce it with a needle to drain the pus.
Eardrops may not work if they're not used correctly.
How to use eardrops
Preventing ear infections
You cannot always prevent ear infections, particularly inner ear infections caused by colds and flu.
To help avoid inner ear infections:
make sure your child is up to date with vaccinations
keep your child away from smoky environments
try not to give your child a dummy after they're 6 months old
To help avoid outer ear infections:
do not stick cotton wool buds or your fingers in your ears
use earplugs or a swimming hat over your ears when you swim
try to avoid water or shampoo getting into your ears when you have a shower or bath
treat conditions that affect your ears, such as eczema or an allergy to hearing aids
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 16 June 2021
Next review due: 16 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright