Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Nosebleed
Nosebleeds are not usually a sign of anything serious. They're common, particularly in children, and most can be easily treated at home.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
a child under 2 years old has a nosebleed
you have regular nosebleeds
you have symptoms of anaemia – such as a faster heartbeat (palpitations), shortness of breath and pale skin
you're taking a blood-thinning medicine, such as warfarin
you have a condition that means your blood cannot clot properly, such as haemophilia
The GP might want to test you for haemophilia or for other conditions like anaemia.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E if:
your nosebleed lasts longer than 10 to 15 minutes
the bleeding seems excessive
you're swallowing a large amount of blood that makes you vomit
the bleeding started after a blow to your head
you're feeling weak or dizzy
you're having difficulty breathing
Causes of a nosebleed
The inside of the nose is delicate and nosebleeds happen when it's damaged. This can be caused by:
picking your nose
blowing your nose too hard
the inside of your nose being too dry (maybe because of a change in air temperature)
Nosebleeds that need medical attention can come from deeper inside the nose and usually affect adults. They can be caused by:
an injury or broken nose
high blood pressure
conditions that affect the blood vessels or how the blood clots
certain medicines, like warfarin
Sometimes the cause of a nosebleed is unknown.
Certain people are more prone to getting nosebleeds, including:
children (they usually grow out of them by 11)
elderly people
pregnant women
How to stop a nosebleed yourself
If you have a nosebleed, you should:
sit down and lean forward, with your head tilted forward
pinch your nose just above your nostrils for 10 to 15 minutes
breathe through your mouth
Holding an icepack (or a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel) on the top of the nose may help reduce the blood flow. But the evidence to show it works is not very strong.
Video: How to treat a nosebleed
This video shows you how to treat a nosebleed.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 5 June 2017
Media review due: 5 June 2020
Hospital treatment for nosebleeds
If doctors can see where the blood is coming from, they may seal it by pressing a stick with a chemical on it to stop the bleeding.
If this is not possible, doctors might pack your nose with sponges to stop the bleeding. You may need to stay in hospital for a day or two.
When a nosebleed stops
After a nosebleed, for 24 hours try not to:
blow your nose
pick your nose
drink hot drinks or alcohol
do any heavy lifting or strenuous exercise
pick any scabs
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 22 January 2021
Next review due: 22 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright