Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Pityriasis rosea
Pityriasis rosea is a relatively common skin condition that causes a temporary rash of raised red scaly patches on the body.
It can affect anyone, but it's more common in older children and young adults (aged 10 to 35).
Symptoms of pityriasis rosea
Feeling unwell
Some people feel unwell for a few days before they get the rash, with symptoms such as a headache, high temperature and joint pain.
The herald patch
Credit:
A single pink or red oval patch of scaly skin, called the "herald patch", usually appears at least 2 days before a more widespread rash develops.
The herald patch ranges in size from 2cm to 10cm. It can appear on your tummy, chest, back or neck, and less often on your face or scalp, or near your genitals.
Widespread rash
Credit:
Up to 2 weeks after the herald patch appears, a more widespread rash develops, which may continue to spread over the following 2 to 6 weeks.
This rash is small, raised, scaly patches that usually range in size up to 1.5cm. Most people get many patches on their chest, back, tummy, neck, upper arms and upper thighs. The face is not usually affected.
The rash is not painful, but it can be itchy.
In light-skinned people the patches are usually a pinkish-red. In dark-skinned people the patches can sometimes be grey, dark brown or black.
Both the herald patch and rash usually last for 2 to 12 weeks, although they can last for up to 5 months.
After the rash has gone, you may have some darker or lighter areas of skin. These should return to normal within a few months and will not leave permanent scarring.
When to see a GP
See a GP if you have an unexplained rash. They'll usually be able to confirm whether it's pityriasis rosea, or another skin condition such as eczema, psoriasis or ringworm.
If the GP is uncertain, they may refer you to a skin specialist (dermatologist).
Treating pityriasis rosea
Pityriasis rosea usually gets better without treatment within 12 weeks. Treatment is not needed unless you experience discomfort and itching.
Possible treatments for pityriasis rosea include:
emollients – creams that moisturise and soothe the skin. Some emollients can be used as soap, and are often recommended, because normal soap can irritate the rash. You can buy these over the counter from most pharmacists
steroid creams or ointments – such as hydrocortisone and betamethasone cream. These are prescribed by a GP and can reduce swelling and relieve itching
antihistamines – if you're having trouble sleeping because of the itching, a GP may prescribe an antihistamine that will make you feel sleepy, such as hydroxyzine or chlorphenamine
UVB light therapy – if other treatments do not work, you may be referred for UVB light therapy
What causes pityriasis rosea?
It's not known what causes pityriasis rosea. One theory is that the rash may be caused by a viral infection.
Pityriasis rosea is not contagious and cannot be spread to other people through physical contact.
Pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis versicolor is another common skin condition that can be confused with pityriasis rosea, as the rash may look similar.
But there are important differences between these 2 conditions. Pityriasis versicolor is caused by a yeast infection and can be treated with antifungal medicines, including antifungal creams and antifungal shampoos.
Page last reviewed: 13 March 2020
Next review due: 13 March 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright