Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Cradle cap
Cradle cap is a harmless skin condition that's common in babies. It usually clears up on its own, but there are things you can try to make it better.
Check if your baby has cradle cap
Cradle cap can look like patches of greasy and yellow crusts.
Credit:
The crusts can flake and make the skin look red.
Credit:
It can appear on other parts of the body, like the eyebrows, nose and nappy area.
Credit:
Cradle cap is not itchy or painful and does not bother your baby.
It's not clear what causes cradle cap. It cannot be caught from another baby.
Things you can try to get rid of cradle cap
Do
wash your baby's hair regularly with mild, unperfumed baby shampoo and gently loosen flakes with a soft brush
gently rub on baby oil or vegetable oil to help soften the crusts
use baby oil, vegetable oil or petroleum jelly overnight and wash with baby shampoo in the morning
Don’t
do not use olive oil – recent research has found it may not be suitable for use on skin
do not use peanut oil (because of the allergy risk)
do not use soap
do not use adult shampoos
do not pick crusts – this can cause an infection
Information:
Hair may come away with the flakes, but do not worry, your baby's hair will soon grow back.
You can ask a pharmacist:
about cradle cap treatments
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the cradle cap is all over your baby's body
the crusts leak fluid or bleed
the affected areas look swollen
there's no improvement after a few weeks of treatment
These could be signs of an infection or another condition, like eczema or scabies.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Page last reviewed: 24 January 2019
Next review due: 24 January 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright