Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Bursitis
Bursitis is when a joint becomes painful and swollen. It can usually be treated at home and should go away in a few weeks.
Check if you have bursitis
Bursitis happens when the fluid-filled sacs (bursa) that cushion your joints become inflamed.
You might have bursitis if 1 of your joints is:
painful – usually a dull, achy pain
tender or warmer than surrounding skin
swollen
more painful when you move it or press on it
The area may also be red. This can be harder to see on darker skin.
Bursitis can affect any joint, but it's most common in the shoulders, hips, elbows or knees.
How to treat bursitis yourself
To help bring down swelling and pain you can:
rest – try not to move the joint too much and avoid activities that put pressure on it
use ice – gently hold an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a tea towel on the area for around 10 minutes at a time and repeat every few hours during the day
take painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, to ease any pain
It may also help to put extra cushions around the affected joint while you sleep, to help protect and support it.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your symptoms have not improved or are getting worse after treating it yourself for 1 to 2 weeks
you have a high temperature, or you feel hot and shivery
you cannot move the affected joint
you have very severe, sharp or shooting pains in the joint
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
They may take a sample of fluid from the affected joint using a needle (aspiration). This will be sent off to test for an infection and conditions, such as gout.
The aspiration may also help your symptoms. It might be done in your GP surgery or you may be referred to the hospital.
If your symptoms do not get better, you may also be referred for other tests.
Treatments for bursitis
antibiotics – usually taken for 7 days if bursitis is caused by an infection
a steroid injection may be given into the affected joint to reduce the swelling – this will not be done if bursitis is caused by an infection
if bursitis is severe or keeps coming back, the inflamed bursa may need to be surgically drained or even removed (but this is rare)
How to stop bursitis coming back
Do
maintain a healthy weight – being overweight puts more pressure on your joints
clean any cuts on elbows and knees to prevent infections
warm up properly before exercising and playing sport
use padding when putting a lot of pressure on joints (for example, when kneeling)
take regular breaks if you do things that put pressure on a joint, like kneeling
Don’t
do not knock or bang your joints
Page last reviewed: 29 December 2020
Next review due: 29 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright