Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (also known as MERS or MERS-CoV) is a rare but severe respiratory illness.
It can start with a fever and cough, which can develop into pneumonia and breathing difficulties.
MERS was first identified in 2012 in the Middle East and is most common in that region.
The risk of infection with MERS to people in the UK is very low.
How do you catch MERS?
MERS is spread between animals and people. There's evidence that camels in the Middle East are the main source of the virus.
MERS can also be passed from person to person through cough droplets. But it does not seem to be very contagious between people unless they're in close contact.
There have been 5 cases of MERS in the UK since 2012. The most recent case was identified in August 2018, with previous cases diagnosed in 2012-13.
Symptoms of MERS
Symptoms include:
fever
cough
difficulty breathing
diarrhoea and vomiting
You should call a GP or NHS 111 if you have symptoms and believe you could have caught the infection – for instance, if you have recently been to the Middle East or have been in contact with someone with a confirmed infection.
Treatment for MERS
There's no specific treatment for MERS. Treatment aims to relieve the symptoms.
Around 35% of people who get MERS die as a result of the infection.
Advice to travellers going to the Middle East
All travellers, particularly those with long-term medical conditions, should practise good hygiene.
This means regularly washing your hands with soap and water, especially after visiting farms, barns or market areas.
You should also:
avoid contact with camels
avoid raw camel milk and/or camel products
avoid eating or drinking any type of raw milk, raw milk products, and any food that may be contaminated with animal secretions, unless it's been peeled and cleaned and/or thoroughly cooked
Advice to travellers returning from the Middle East
If you develop a fever, cough or difficulty breathing within 14 days of returning from the Middle East, you should get medical advice.
Call NHS 111 or a GP.
Page last reviewed: 29 September 2021
Next review due: 29 September 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright