Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Black eye
A black eye is bruising and swelling around your eye, usually caused by a blow to the area, such as a punch or fall. It should get better within 2 to 3 weeks.
How to ease a black eye yourself
Do
gently hold an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a cloth) to the area around your eye for about 10 to 20 minutes at a time, and repeat regularly during the first 1 to 2 days
take painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen for any pain
after the first 2 days, gently apply a warm (not hot) heat pack or cloth to the area around your eye regularly during the day
Don’t
do not take aspirin, unless prescribed by a doctor, as this can make the bruising worse
do not press or rub the area around your eye
do not put ice directly on your skin
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if:
you have severe pain or swelling
you have a headache that does not go away, or blurry vision
the area around your eye is warm or leaking pus
your temperature is very high, or you feel hot and shivery
you're taking blood-thinning medicine (such as warfarin)
you have a bleeding disorder (such as haemophilia)
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the black eye does not go away within 3 weeks
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Go to A&E if:
there's blood visible in your eye
you have an irregularly shaped pupil (the black dot at the centre of the eye)
you had a blow to the head and have bruising around both eyes
you have problems with your vision, such as double vision, loss of vision, seeing flashing light, halos or shadows, or pain when looking at a bright light
you cannot move your eye
Find an A&E department
Page last reviewed: 26 October 2020
Next review due: 26 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright