Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Mental health Feelings, symptoms and behaviours Behaviours Self-harm
Where to get help for self-harm
It's important to know that support is available for anyone who self-harms or thinks about self-harm, as well as their friends and family.
It's best to speak to a GP about self-harm, but you may also find it helpful to speak to a free listening service or support organisation.
Urgent help
If you need help now for a mental health crisis or emergency, read about where to get urgent help for mental health.
If you just need to talk, any time of day or night
Free listening services
These services offer confidential advice from trained volunteers. You can talk about anything that's troubling you, no matter how difficult:
Call 116 123 to talk to Samaritans, or email: jo@samaritans.org for a reply within 24 hours
Text "SHOUT" to 85258 to contact the Shout Crisis Text Line, or text "YM" if you're under 19
If you're under 19, you can also call 0800 1111 to talk to Childline. The number will not appear on your phone bill.
If you prefer a webchat, these services are available at certain times:
Self Injury Support webchat (for women and girls) is open Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday from 7pm to 9.30pm
CALM webchat (for men) is open from 5pm to midnight every day
Non-urgent advice:
Speak to a GP if:
you're harming yourself
you're having thoughts about harming yourself
you're worried about minor injuries, such as small cuts or burns – without treatment there is a risk of infection
Some people who self-harm are at a higher risk of suicide.
It's important to get support or treatment as soon as possible to help with the underlying cause and prevent suicidal thoughts developing.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How a GP can help with self-harm
A GP will listen and discuss the best options for you, which could include self-help or support groups. They can also give you advice and treatment for minor injuries.
They may ask you detailed questions to help them understand the cause of your self-harm. It's important to be honest with them, even if you do not know why you self-harm.
If needed, a GP may discuss referring you for an assessment with a local community mental health team (CMHT). An assessment will help your care team work out a treatment plan with you, such as a talking therapy, to help you manage your self-harm.
Read more about assessment and treatments for self-harm.
Further information and support
These organisations offer information and support for anyone who self-harms or thinks about self-harm, or their friends and family:
Mind – call 0300 123 3393 or text 86463 (9am to 6pm on weekdays)
Harmless – email info@harmless.org.uk
Self-injury Support (for women and girls)
CALM (for men)
YoungMinds Parents Helpline – call 0808 802 5544 (9.30am to 4pm on weekdays)
National Self Harm Network forums
If you struggle with suicidal thoughts or are supporting someone else, the Staying Safe website provides information on how to make a safety plan. It includes video tutorials and online templates to guide you through the process.
More in Self-harm
Where to get help for self-harm
Why people self-harm
Ways to help avoid self-harm
How to tell someone about self-harm
Assessment and treatments
How to help someone else
Page last reviewed: 23 July 2020
Next review due: 23 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright