Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Ingrown toenail
An ingrown toenail is a common problem where the nail grows into the toe. It can be painful, but there are things you can do to ease the pain.
Check if you have an ingrown toenail
You usually get an ingrown toenail on your big toe. But you can get them on any toe.
Your toe may be red, painful and swollen.
Credit:
Your toenail may curve into your toe.
Credit:
Your toe can also get infected.
Signs of an infected toe include:
pus coming out of it
you feel hot or shivery
How to treat an ingrown toenail at home
If you go to a GP with an ingrown toenail, they'll usually suggest you try these things first.
Do
soak your foot in warm, salty water to help soften the skin around your toe and reduce the chances of infection
keep your foot dry for the rest of the day
wear wide, comfortable shoes or sandals
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain
Don’t
do not cut your toenail – leave it to grow out
do not pick at your toe or toenail
do not wear tight, pointy shoes
A pharmacist can help with an ingrown toenail
You can ask a pharmacist about:
treatments to help ease the pain and prevent an infection
whether you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
treating your ingrown toenail at home is not helping
your toe is painful and swollen with pus coming out of it
you have a very high temperature or you feel hot or shivery
you have diabetes and an ingrown toenail – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments for an ingrown toenail
A GP can:
check your toe to see if it's an ingrown toenail
give you antibiotics if your toenail is infected
If you have a badly ingrown toenail, they may refer you to a foot specialist (podiatrist).
Treatment from a foot specialist
A podiatrist may offer further treatments, such as:
cutting away part of the nail
removing the whole nail
You'll have an injection of local anaesthetic to numb your toe when this is done.
Referral to a podiatrist on the NHS may not be available to everyone and waiting times can be long. You can pay to see a podiatrist privately.
Find a podiatrist
How to prevent ingrown toenails
To help stop ingrown toenails:
do not cut your toenails too short
cut straight across the nail, not the edges
do not wear shoes that are too tight or do not fit properly
keep your feet clean and dry them thoroughly
Page last reviewed: 24 January 2022
Next review due: 24 January 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright