Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Stretch marks
Stretch marks are very common. They're harmless and often get less visible over time.
Check if you have stretch marks
Stretch marks look like lines or streaks across the skin.
Stretch marks can be pink, red, brown, black, silver or purple. They usually start off darker and fade over time.
Credit:
Stretch marks are most common on the tummy, breasts, chest, upper arms, legs, bottom, hips or back.
Credit:
Common causes of stretch marks
Stretch marks are often caused by sudden growth or weight gain.
You may be more likely to get them if you:
are pregnant
are going through puberty
lose or gain weight quickly
are female
are overweight
use some kinds of steroid creams or tablets
have a family member with stretch marks
Rarely, stretch marks can be due to a condition called Cushing's syndrome.
Information:
Find out more about stretch marks in pregnancy
What to do about stretch marks
Stretch marks usually fade over time but may not disappear completely.
Many creams and lotions claim to prevent, reduce or remove stretch marks. But there's very little evidence these work.
There are some treatments that may help make stretch marks look better, but they will not get rid of them.
They include:
retinoid (often called tretinoin) creams or hyaluronic acid – these may help if used on new stretch marks, but you should not use retinoid creams if you're pregnant as they may harm your baby
light or laser treatments
microdermabrasion, which removes a thin layer of skin
You would need to pay for these treatments as they're not available on the NHS.
Information:
It's not always possible to prevent stretch marks. The best way to reduce your chance of getting them is by maintaining a healthy weight.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
You have large stretch marks and:
more fat on your chest and tummy, but slim arms and legs
a build-up of fat on the back of your neck and shoulders
a red, puffy, rounded face
These could be symptoms of Cushing's syndrome.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Page last reviewed: 07 December 2021
Next review due: 07 December 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright