Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Birthmarks
Birthmarks are coloured marks on the skin that are present at birth or soon afterwards. Most are harmless and disappear without treatment, but some may need to be treated.
Types of birthmark
There are many different types of birthmark.
Flat, red or pink areas of skin (salmon patches or stork marks)
Credit:
Salmon patches:
are red or pink patches, often on a baby's eyelids, head or neck
are very common
look red or pink on light and dark skin
are easier to see when a baby cries
usually fade by the age of 2 when on the forehead or eyelids
can take longer to fade when on the back of the head or neck
Raised red lumps (strawberry marks or haemangiomas)
Credit:
Strawberry marks:
are blood vessels that form a raised red lump on the skin
appear soon after birth
usually look red on light and dark skin
are more common in girls, premature babies (born before 37 weeks), low birth weight babies, and multiple births, such as twins
get bigger for the first 6 to 12 months, and then shrink and disappear by the age of 7
sometimes appear under the skin, making it look blue or purple
may need treatment if they affect vision, breathing, or feeding
Red, purple or dark marks (port wine stains)
Credit:
Port wine stains:
are red, purple or dark marks and usually on the face and neck
are present from birth
look like very dark patches on dark skin
usually affect one side of the body, but can affect both
can sometimes be made lighter using laser treatment (it's most effective on young children)
can become darker and lumpier if not treated
can be a sign of Sturge-Weber syndrome and Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, or macrocephaly-capillary malformation, but this is rare
Flat, light or dark brown patches (cafe-au-lait spots)
Credit:
Cafe-au-lait spots:
are light or dark brown patches that can be anywhere on the body
are common, with many children often having 1 or 2
look darker on dark skin
can be different sizes and shapes
may be a sign of neurofibromatosis type 1 if a child has 6 or more spots
Blue-grey spots
Credit:
These birthmarks:
can look blue-grey on the skin like a bruise
are often on the lower back, bottom, arms or legs
are there from birth
are most common on babies with darker skin
do not need treating and will usually go away by the age of 4
are not a sign of a health condition
If your baby is born with a blue-grey spot it should be recorded on their medical record.
Brown or black moles (congenital moles or congenital melanocytic naevi)
Credit:
Congenital moles:
are brown or black moles caused by an overgrowth of pigment cells in the skin
look darker on dark skin
can become darker, raised and hairy, particularly during puberty
may develop into skin cancer if they're large (the risk increases the larger they are)
do not need to be treated unless there's a risk of skin cancer
Information:
Find out about other types of birthmark:
The Birthmark Support Group has information about other types of birthmark and getting help and support.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you're worried about a birthmark
a birthmark is close to the eye, nose, or mouth
a birthmark has got bigger, darker or lumpier
a birthmark is sore or painful
your child has 6 or more cafe-au-lait spots
you or your child has a large congenital mole
The GP may ask you to check the birthmark for changes, or they may refer you to a skin specialist (dermatologist).
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for birthmarks
Most birthmarks do not need treatment, but some do. This is why it's important to get a birthmark checked if you're worried about it.
A birthmark can be removed on the NHS if it's affecting a person's health. If you want a birthmark removed for cosmetic reasons, you'll have to pay to have it done privately.
Possible treatments for birthmarks include:
medicines – to reduce blood flow to the birthmark, which can slow down its growth and make it lighter in colour
laser therapy – where heat and light are used to make the birthmark smaller and lighter (it works best if started between 6 months and 1 year of age)
surgery – to remove the birthmark (but it can leave scarring)
Page last reviewed: 04 February 2020
Next review due: 04 February 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright