Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Gum disease
Gum disease is where the gums become red, swollen and sore, and bleed. It's very common, but it's important to get it checked by a dentist.
Check if you have gum disease
Symptoms of gum disease include:
your gums bleeding when you brush your teeth, floss or eat hard foods such as apples
your gums becoming swollen, red and sore
Gum disease can lead to:
bad breath and a bad taste in the mouth
your gums shrinking
your teeth becoming loose or falling out
Non-urgent advice:
See a dentist if:
your gums bleed when you brush your teeth or eat hard foods
your gums are painful and swollen
you have bad breath
your child has sore, bleeding gums
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent dentist appointment if:
You or your child have gum disease and other symptoms such as:
very sore and swollen gums
teeth becoming loose or falling out
ulcers or red patches in your mouth
a lump in your mouth or on your lip
Information:
To see a dentist in an emergency or out of hours:
call your dentist – if they're closed, their answerphone may tell you what to do
If you do not have a dentist or cannot get an emergency appointment:
call 111 – they can advise you what to do
find a dentist near you – ask if you can have an emergency appointment
You may have to pay for your appointment.
Read more about NHS dental charges.
Get regular dental check-ups
You should have regular dental check-ups even if you do not have any problems. See a dentist if you have not had a check-up for 2 years (or 1 year if you're under 18).
Treatments for gum disease
Your dentist will check your teeth and gums, and may take some X-rays to check your teeth and jaw bone.
They may also refer you to a specialist for further tests and treatment.
How gum disease is treated depends on how severe it is.
In the early stages, your dentist will:
give you advice about keeping your teeth clean, such as using interdental brushes
advise you to stop smoking, if you smoke
advise you to get your teeth cleaned by a hygienist
If your gum disease is serious, you may need:
to have deep cleaning under the gums
antibiotics
to have some teeth removed
gum surgery
Cost of dental treatment
Preventing gum disease
Gum disease is caused by a build-up of plaque on the teeth.
If you do not remove plaque from your teeth by brushing and cleaning in between them regularly, it builds up and irritates your gums.
There are things you can do yourself to prevent gum disease.
Do
brush your teeth with fluoride toothpaste at least twice a day – spit after brushing, do not rinse
clean in between your teeth every day using floss or interdental brushes
replace your toothbrush every 1 to 3 months
see a dentist and dental hygienist for regular check-ups, especially if you're pregnant or have type 2 diabetes
Don’t
do not use mouthwash straight after brushing your teeth
do not smoke
Information:
Find out more
Taking care of your teeth and gums
Looking after your children's teeth
Looking after your baby's teeth
Page last reviewed: 18 February 2022
Next review due: 18 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright