Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Temporal arteritis
Temporal arteritis (giant cell arteritis) is where the arteries, particularly those at the side of the head (the temples), become inflamed. It's serious and needs urgent treatment.
Symptoms of temporal arteritis
The symptoms of temporal arteritis depend on which arteries are affected.
The main symptoms are:
frequent, severe headaches
pain and tenderness over the temples
jaw pain while eating or talking
vision problems, such as double vision or loss of vision in 1 or both eyes
More general symptoms are also common – for example, flu-like symptoms, unintentional weight loss, depression and tiredness.
About 2 in 5 people with temporal arteritis also develop polymyalgia rheumatica. This causes pain, stiffness and inflammation in the muscles around the shoulders, neck and hips.
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you think you might have temporal arteritis
It can lead to serious problems like stroke and blindness if not treated quickly.
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
What happens at your appointment
The GP will ask you about your symptoms and examine your temples.
After having some blood tests, you'll be referred to a specialist.
They may carry out further tests to help diagnose temporal arteritis.
You may have:
an ultrasound scan of your temples
a biopsy under local anaesthetic – where a small piece of the temporal artery is removed and checked for signs of temporal arteritis
If you have problems with your vision, you should have a same-day appointment with an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) at a hospital eye department.
Treatment for temporal arteritis
Temporal arteritis is treated with steroid medicine, usually prednisolone.
Treatment will be started before temporal arteritis is confirmed because of the risk of vision loss if it's not dealt with quickly.
There are 2 stages of treatment:
An initial high dose of steroids for a few weeks to help bring your symptoms under control.
A lower steroid dose (after your symptoms have improved) given over a longer period of time, possibly several years.
A small number of people may need to take steroids for the rest of their life.
You'll have regular follow-ups to see how you're doing and check for any side effects you may have.
Steroids
Do not suddenly stop taking steroids unless your doctor tells you to. Stopping a prescribed course of medicine could make you very ill.
Other treatments
Other types of medicine you may need if you have temporal arteritis include:
low-dose aspirin – to reduce the risk of a stroke or heart attack, which can happen if the arteries to your heart are affected
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) – to lower your risk of getting a stomach problem like indigestion or a stomach ulcer, which can be a side effect of taking prednisolone
bisphosphonate therapy – to reduce the risk of osteoporosis when taking prednisolone
immunosuppressants – to allow steroid medicine to be reduced and help prevent temporal arteritis coming back
Page last reviewed: 18 November 2020
Next review due: 18 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright