Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Infected piercings
An infected piercing can be serious if it's not treated quickly. Get immediate medical help if you think your piercing is infected.
What's normal for a new piercing
For the first few weeks a new piercing might:
be tender, itchy, and the surrounding area may look slightly red on white skin, or a little darker than usual on dark skin
produce a pale fluid that forms a crust
If you've had an ear or nose cartilage piercing, small lumps can sometimes form around the piercing.
The lumps, called granulomas, are trapped fluid. You can treat them by soaking a pad in warm water then holding the pad against them once a day.
Check if you have an infected piercing
Your piercing might be infected if:
the area around it is swollen, painful, hot, very red or dark (depending on your skin colour)
there's blood or pus coming out of it – pus can be white, green or yellow
you feel hot or shivery or generally unwell
Credit:
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if:
you think your piercing might be infected
Leave your jewellery in (unless a doctor tells you to take it out).
Treatment for infected piercings
You may need antibiotics if your piercing is infected. This can be a cream, ointment, or tablets.
How to prevent infections in new piercings
Do
choose a qualified, experienced and licensed piercer
clean your piercing twice a day
use warm, salty water to soften any crusting
gently turn the jewellery while cleaning the piercing
use a clean paper towel to dry the piercing
gargle with salty water or an alcohol-free mouthwash if you have a mouth piercing
Don’t
do not do your own piercings (you're much more likely to get an infection)
do not use cotton wool to clean the piercing (use a cotton bud or pad)
do not pick at any crusting
do not twist or turn jewellery when the piercing is dry
do not use a towel to dry the piercing
do not have sex until a genital piercing has healed
do not have oral sex until a mouth piercing has healed
do not go swimming for the first 24 hours after a piercing
Things to ask your piercer
If you're thinking about getting a piercing, ask the piercer:
to explain what they're going to do
whether there are any risks
how to care for your piercing
how long it will take to heal
Page last reviewed: 16 April 2020
Next review due: 16 April 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright