Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Leptospirosis (Weil's disease)
Leptospirosis, also called Weil's disease, is an infection you can get from animals. It's rare in the UK.
How you get leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is spread in the pee of infected animals – most commonly rats, mice, cows, pigs and dogs.
You can get leptospirosis if:
soil or freshwater (such as water from a river, canal or lake) that contains infected pee gets in your mouth, eyes or a cut – usually during activities like kayaking, outdoor swimming or fishing
you touch an infected animal's blood or flesh – usually from working with animals or animal parts
It's very rare to get leptospirosis from pets, other people or bites.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you might have been exposed to infected pee and you have:
a high temperature, or you feel hot and shivery
a headache
been feeling sick (nausea), you're being sick, or you have diarrhoea
aching muscles and joints
red eyes
loss of appetite
These are symptoms of leptospirosis.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment if you have:
yellow skin and eyes (jaundice)
a rash
been unable to pee
swollen ankles, feet or hands
chest pain
shortness of breath
been coughing up blood
You might have a serious form of the infection that needs to be treated quickly.
Treatment from a GP
A GP may prescribe antibiotic tablets to treat the infection. Most people recover in a few days or weeks.
It's important to finish the course of antibiotics, even if you start to feel better.
Take paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve any aches, pains or a high temperature.
If you have a more serious form of the infection, you may need to be treated in hospital.
How to avoid getting leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is rare in the UK. You have a higher chance of getting it if you do outdoor activities like water sports (especially while abroad in tropical areas), or you work with animals or animal parts.
To reduce your chances of getting leptospirosis:
Do
wash your hands with soap and water after handling animals or animal products
clean any wounds as soon as possible
cover any cuts and grazes with waterproof plasters
wear protective clothing if you're at risk through your job
shower as soon as possible if you've been in potentially infected water
check your dog is vaccinated against leptospirosis (there is no vaccine for people)
Don’t
do not touch water or soil that may contain animal pee
do not touch dead animals with your bare hands
do not drink water from places like rivers, canals or lakes – always boil or treat it first
Page last reviewed: 17 September 2020
Next review due: 17 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright