Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
If you're worried because you think you've got an STI, go for a check-up at a sexual health clinic as soon as you can.
Do not have sex, including oral sex, without using a condom until you've had a check-up.
You can have an STI without knowing it and infect your partner during sex.
Important:
Using sexual health clinics during coronavirus (COVID-19)
Call a sexual health clinic if you need help or advice. Only go to a clinic if you've been told to.
Find sexual health clinic contact details
STI symptoms
The symptoms of an STI can include:
an unusual discharge from the vagina, penis or anus
pain when peeing
lumps or skin growths around the genitals or bottom (anus)
a rash
unusual vaginal bleeding
itchy genitals or anus
blisters and sores around your genitals or anus
warts around your genitals or anus
warts in your mouth or throat, but this is very rare
Non-urgent advice:
Go to a sexual health clinic if:
you have symptoms of an STI
a sexual partner has symptoms of an STI
you're worried after having sex without a condom
you're pregnant with symptoms of an STI
Many STIs have no symptoms at all, like HIV. The only way to know for sure is to get tested.
Find a sexual health clinic
Why you should go to a sexual health clinic
You can see a GP, but they'll probably refer you to a sexual health clinic if they think you may have an STI.
Sexual health clinics treat problems with the genitals and urine system. You can usually turn up without an appointment.
You'll often get test results quicker than from the GP and you may not have to pay a prescription fee for treatment.
You can feel comfortable sharing information about your sexual activities or orientation with a doctor. You do not need to give your real name or tell staff who the GP is if you do not want to.
No information about your visit to the clinic will be shared with the GP or anyone else outside the clinic unless you ask for it to be.
You can ask to see a female or male doctor or nurse if you wish.
What happens at a sexual health clinic
At a sexual health clinic, a doctor or nurse:
will ask you some questions about your sex life
may ask to look at your genitals or anus
will tell you what tests they think you need
Some clinics offer home testing kits for some STIs.
If tests show you have an STI, you should tell your sexual partner and any ex-partners so they can get tested and treated as well.
If you do not want to do this, the clinic can usually do it for you without naming you.
Common types of STI
Types of STI include:
Chlamydia
Gonorrhoea
Trichomoniasis
Genital warts
Genital herpes
Pubic lice
Scabies
Syphilis
Human papillomavirus (HPV)
Page last reviewed: 25 June 2021
Next review due: 25 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright