Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Lumbar puncture
A lumbar puncture is where a thin needle is inserted between the bones in your lower spine. It should not be painful, but you may have a headache and some back pain for a few days.
It's carried out in hospital by a doctor or specialist nurse.
When a lumbar puncture may be needed
A lumbar puncture may be used to:
take a sample of fluid from your spinal cord (cerebrospinal fluid) or measure the fluid's pressure – to help diagnose a condition
inject medicine – such as painkillers, antibiotics or chemotherapy
inject a spinal anaesthetic (epidural) – to numb the lower part of your body before an operation
remove some fluid to reduce pressure in the skull or spine
Before having a lumbar puncture
Your doctor or nurse should explain what's going to happen and why you need a lumbar puncture.
A few days or weeks before the test:
you may have a CT scan or MRI scan – to make sure you need the lumbar puncture and it's safe to have one
let the hospital know if you're taking blood-thinning medicine (anticoagulants) – such as warfarin
On the day:
you can eat, drink and take medicine as normal
you'll be asked to sign a consent form
you'll usually need to undress and change into a hospital gown before the procedure – you might also want to use the toilet
What happens during a lumbar puncture
You normally lie on your side, with your legs pulled up and your chin tucked in
Credit:
This allows the needle to be inserted between the bones more easily
Credit:
The doctor or nurse will:
Clean your skin and numb the area with local anaesthetic (you'll be awake during the procedure). Children may also be given medicine to help them relax and keep still.
Insert a thin needle through the skin, between 2 bones in the lower part of your spine. This should not be painful, but you may feel some pressure.
Remove the needle once the procedure is finished and apply a small plaster or dressing.
How long does a lumbar puncture take?
A lumbar puncture takes around 30 to 45 minutes, but you'll need to stay lying down at the hospital for at least another hour while the nurses monitor you.
You'll be able to go home the same day if you feel well enough, but you would not be able to drive yourself home.
Getting the results
The doctor or nurse who performs the lumbar puncture can often tell you some of the results straight away and explain what they mean.
You may need to wait for at least 48 hours for the full results. Some laboratory test results are available within a couple of hours in an emergency.
Side effects of a lumbar puncture
A lumbar puncture is generally a safe procedure and serious side effects are uncommon.
The most common side effects are:
headaches, which can last for up to a week – you'll be given painkillers at the hospital if you need them
swelling and lower back pain where the needle was inserted – this should get better on its own after a few days and is normally nothing to worry about
Recovering from a lumbar puncture
While you're recovering from a lumbar puncture:
Do
drink plenty of fluids
take painkillers, such as paracetamol
lie down instead of sitting upright
try drinks containing caffeine, such as coffee, tea or cola – some people find this helps to relieve the headaches
remove the dressing or plaster yourself the next day
Don’t
do not drive or operate machinery for at least 24 hours
do not play sport or do any strenuous activities for at least a week
Non-urgent advice:
Contact the hospital team or a GP if:
your headaches are severe or do not go away
you're feeling or being sick
you have a very high temperature or feel hot and shivery
it's painful to look at bright lights
the swelling in your back lasts for more than a few days or keeps getting worse
you see blood or clear fluid leaking from your back
What we mean by severe pain
Page last reviewed: 19 February 2021
Next review due: 19 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright