Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Contents
Overview
Diagnosis
Treatment
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a condition in which the lungs become scarred and breathing becomes increasingly difficult.
It's not clear what causes it, but it usually affects people who are around 70 to 75 years old, and is rare in people under 50.
Several treatments can help reduce the rate at which IPF gets worse, but there's currently no treatment that can stop or reverse the scarring of the lungs.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis:
British Lung Foundation: Coronavirus and COVID-19
Action for Pulmonary Fibrosis: Coronavirus information
Pulmonary Fibrosis Trust: COVID-19 information
Symptoms of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
The symptoms of IPF tend to develop gradually and get slowly worse over time.
Symptoms can include:
shortness of breath
a persistent dry cough
tiredness
loss of appetite and weight loss
rounded and swollen fingertips (clubbed fingers)
Many people ignore their breathlessness at first and blame it on getting old or being out of shape.
But eventually even light activity such as getting dressed can cause shortness of breath.
When to get medical advice
See a GP if you have struggled with your breathing for a while or have had a cough for more than 3 weeks.
These symptoms are not normal and should not be ignored.
If a GP thinks you could have a lung condition such as IPF, they can refer you to a hospital specialist for tests such as:
breathing (lung function) tests
blood tests
a chest X-ray and CT scan
a lung biopsy, where a small piece of lung tissue is removed during keyhole surgery so it can be analysed
Find out more about the tests for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Causes of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
In people with IPF, the tiny air sacs in the lungs (alveoli) become damaged and increasingly scarred.
This causes the lungs to become stiff and means it's difficult for oxygen to get into the blood.
The reason this happens is not clear. Idiopathic means the cause is unknown.
IPF has been linked to:
exposure to certain types of dust, such as metal or wood dust
viral infections
a family history of IPF – around 1 in 20 people with IPF has another family member with the condition
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)
smoking
But it's not known whether some of these factors directly cause IPF.
Treatments for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
There's currently no cure for IPF, but there are several treatments that can help relieve the symptoms and slow down its progression.
Treatments include:
self care measures, such as stopping smoking, eating healthily and exercising regularly
medicines to reduce the rate at which scarring worsens, such as pirfenidone and nintedanib
breathing oxygen through a mask – you can do this while you're at home or while you're out and about
exercises and advice to help you breathe more easily (pulmonary rehabilitation)
a lung transplant – this is suitable in a few cases, although donor lungs are rare
Find out more about how idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is treated
Further information
UK Charities Action for Pulmonary Fibrosis and the Pulmonary Fibrosis Trust provide information and support for people affected by IPF as well as news items about ongoing research into the condition.
Outlook for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
IPF gets worse over time, although the speed at which this happens is highly variable.
Some people respond well to treatment and remain relatively free of symptoms for many years, while others may get rapidly worse or find the breathlessness debilitating.
Other problems can also sometimes develop, including chest infections, pulmonary hypertension and heart failure.
It's very difficult to predict how long someone with IPF will survive at the time of diagnosis.
Regular monitoring over time can indicate whether it's getting worse quickly or slowly.
Before the availability of specific treatments like pirfenidone and nintedanib, about half of people with IPF lived at least 3 years from their diagnosis. Around 1 in 5 survived for more than 5 years.
It's hoped these figures will be improved by the availability of new treatments to slow the disease's progression.
National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service
If you have IPF, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service (NCARDRS).
The NCARDRS help scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat IPF. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Page last reviewed: 20 May 2019
Next review due: 20 May 2022
Next
:
Diagnosis
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright