Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Testicle lumps and swellings
Lumps and swellings in the testicles (balls) are not usually caused by anything serious, but you should always get them checked by a GP.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
a lump in your testicles
swollen testicles
a change in the shape of your testicles
a change in the way your testicles feel
1 testicle that has become bigger than the other
aching or discomfort in your testicles that does not go away
Lumps in the testicles can be a sign of testicular cancer. This is easier to treat if it's found early.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E immediately or call 999 if you have:
sudden, severe pain in a testicle
testicle pain along with feeling sick, being sick or pain in your tummy
testicle pain that has lasted more than an hour or continues when you're resting
These can be signs of a serious problem that needs to be treated in hospital as soon as possible.
Find your nearest A&E
What happens at the GP appointment
To find out what the cause of your lump or swelling is, the GP may:
look at and feel your testicles
shine a torch through the bag of skin containing your testicles (scrotum) to check for a build-up of fluid
refer you for an ultrasound scan
Treatment for a lump or swelling depends on the cause. You might not need treatment if it does not cause any problems and is not getting worse.
If the lump or swelling is painful or very big, the GP may refer you to a specialist for an operation to drain, shrink or remove it.
Causes of testicle lumps and swellings
Lumps and swellings in the testicles can have lots of different causes.
Most are caused by something harmless, such as a build-up of fluid (cyst) or swollen veins in the testicles (varicocele).
But sometimes they can be a sign of something serious, such as testicular cancer.
Do not try to self-diagnose the cause of your lump – always see a GP.
Page last reviewed: 19 August 2020
Next review due: 19 August 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright