Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Thrush in men and women
Thrush is a common yeast infection that affects men and women. It's usually harmless but it can be uncomfortable and keep coming back. It is not classed as a sexually transmitted infection (STI).
Check if you have thrush
Thrush symptoms in women
white vaginal discharge (often like cottage cheese), which does not usually smell
itching and irritation around the vagina
soreness and stinging during sex or when you pee
Thrush symptoms in men
irritation, burning and redness around the head of the penis and under the foreskin
a white discharge (like cottage cheese)
an unpleasant smell
difficulty pulling back the foreskin
Thrush in other areas
Thrush can affect other areas of skin, such as the armpits, groin and between the fingers.
This usually causes a red, itchy or painful rash that scales over with white or yellow discharge. The rash may not be so obvious on darker skin.
Sometimes thrush causes no symptoms at all.
See what thrush looks like on the vagina, penis and skin
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP or go to a sexual health clinic if:
you have the symptoms of thrush for the first time
you're under 16 or over 60
thrush keeps coming back (more than 4 times in 12 months)
treatment has not worked
you're pregnant or breastfeeding
you have thrush and a weakened immune system – for example, because of diabetes, HIV or chemotherapy
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Information:
Sexual health clinics can help with thrush
Sexual health clinics treat problems with the genitals and urine system.
Many sexual health clinics offer a walk-in service, where you do not need an appointment.
They'll often get test results quicker than GP surgeries.
During coronavirus, call a sexual health clinic if you need help or advice. Only go to a clinic if you've been told to.
Find a sexual health clinic
What happens at your appointment
The GP or sexual health clinic will want to confirm it's thrush and rule out other infections.
You'll be asked about your symptoms.
If it's not clear it's thrush:
a doctor or nurse may look at your vagina, penis or skin
a cotton bud may be wiped over the discharge to test for other infections
Thrush treatment
You'll usually need antifungal medicine to get rid of thrush. This can be a tablet you take, a tablet you insert into your vagina (pessary) or a cream to relieve the irritation.
Thrush should clear up within 7 to 14 days of starting treatment.
You do not need to treat partners unless they have symptoms.
Recurring thrush
You might need to take treatment for longer (for up to 6 months) if you keep getting thrush (you get it more than 4 times in 12 months).
A GP or sexual health clinic can help identify if something is causing your thrush, such as your period or sex.
They'll recommend how often you should use treatment.
A pharmacist can help with thrush
You can buy antifungal medicine from pharmacies if you've had thrush diagnosed in the past and you know the symptoms.
A pharmacist can recommend the best treatment for you. Ask if they have a private area to talk if you're embarrassed.
You should not use antifungal medicine more than twice in 6 months without speaking to a pharmacist or doctor.
Find a pharmacy
Things you can do yourself to ease discomfort and prevent thrush returning
Do
use water and emollient (like E45 cream) instead of soap to wash the affected area
dry properly after washing
wear cotton underwear
avoid sex until thrush has cleared up if sex is uncomfortable
Don’t
do not use soaps or shower gels
do not use douches or deodorants on your vagina or penis
do not wear tight underwear or tights
Important
If you have sex during treatment, be aware that antifungal creams can damage condoms and diaphragms. This means your contraception might not work.
What causes thrush
Thrush is not classed as a sexually transmitted infection (STI), but it can be triggered by sex.
Thrush is caused by a fungus called candida that is normally harmless.
Thrush tends to grow in warm, moist conditions and develops if the balance of bacteria changes.
This can happen if:
your skin is irritated or damaged
you're taking antibiotics
you have poorly controlled diabetes
you have a weakened immune system (for example, because of HIV or chemotherapy)
you're having hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
you're pregnant
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 27 October 2020
Next review due: 27 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright