Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Poisoning
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Treatment
Prevention
Poisoning is when a person is exposed to a substance that can damage their health or endanger their life.
Most cases of poisoning happen at home, and children under 5 have the highest risk of accidental poisoning.
There are several thousands of cases in England each year where people intentionally poison themselves as a deliberate act of self-harm.
Signs and symptoms of poisoning
The symptoms of poisoning will depend on the type of poison and the amount taken in, but general things to look out for include:
being sick
stomach pains
confusion
drowsiness and fainting fits
If a child suddenly develops these symptoms, they may have been poisoned, particularly if they're drowsy and confused.
What to do
If you suspect that someone has taken an overdose or has been poisoned, do not try to treat them yourself. Get medical help immediately.
If they do not appear to be seriously ill, call NHS 111 for advice.
If they're showing signs of being seriously ill, such as being sick, loss of consciousness, drowsiness or seizures (fits), call 999 to request an ambulance or take the person to your local A&E department.
In serious cases, it may be necessary for the person to stay in hospital for treatment. Most people admitted to hospital because of poisoning will survive.
Read more about what to do if you think someone has been poisoned.
Types of poisons
Poisons can be swallowed, absorbed through the skin, injected, inhaled or splashed into the eyes.
An overdose of medicine is the most common form of poisoning in the UK. This can include both over-the-counter medicines, such as paracetamol, and prescription medicines, such as antidepressants.
Other potential poisons include:
household products, such as bleach
cosmetic items, such as nail polish
some types of plants and fungi
certain types of household chemicals and pesticides
carbon monoxide
poorly prepared or cooked food, and food that's gone mouldy or been contaminated with bacteria from raw meat (food poisoning)
alcohol, if an excessive amount is consumed over a short period of time (alcohol poisoning)
recreational drugs or substances
medicines prescribed for pets
Snakes and insects, such as wasps and bees, are not poisonous, but their bites or stings can contain venom (toxin).
Preventing poisoning
There are several things you can do to reduce your or your child's risk of poisoning.
These include carefully reading the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine and making sure that any poisonous substances are locked away out of the sight and reach of your children.
Read more about preventing poisoning.
Page last reviewed: 10 September 2021
Next review due: 10 September 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright