Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Heartburn and acid reflux
Heartburn is a burning feeling in the chest caused by stomach acid travelling up towards the throat (acid reflux). If it keeps happening, it's called gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD).
Check if you have acid reflux
The main symptoms of acid reflux are:
heartburn – a burning sensation in the middle of your chest
an unpleasant sour taste in your mouth, caused by stomach acid
You may also have:
a cough or hiccups that keep coming back
a hoarse voice
bad breath
bloating and feeling sick
Your symptoms will probably be worse after eating, when lying down and when bending over.
Causes of heartburn and acid reflux
Lots of people get heartburn from time to time. There's often no obvious reason why.
Sometimes it's caused or made worse by:
certain food and drink – such as coffee, tomatoes, alcohol, chocolate and fatty or spicy foods
being overweight
smoking
pregnancy
stress and anxiety
some medicines, such as anti-inflammatory painkillers (like ibuprofen)
a hiatus hernia – when part of your stomach moves up into your chest
How you can ease heartburn and acid reflux yourself
Simple lifestyle changes can help stop or reduce heartburn.
Do
eat smaller, more frequent meals
raise 1 end of your bed 10 to 20cm by putting something under your bed or mattress – your chest and head should be above the level of your waist, so stomach acid does not travel up towards your throat
try to lose weight if you're overweight
try to find ways to relax
Don’t
do not have food or drink that triggers your symptoms
do not eat within 3 or 4 hours before bed
do not wear clothes that are tight around your waist
do not smoke
do not drink too much alcohol
do not stop taking any prescribed medicine without speaking to a doctor first
A pharmacist can help with heartburn and acid reflux
Speak to a pharmacist for advice if you keep getting heartburn.
They can recommend medicines called antacids that can help ease your symptoms.
It's best to take these with food or soon after eating, as this is when you're most likely to get heartburn. They may also work for longer if taken with food.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
lifestyle changes and pharmacy medicines are not helping
you have heartburn most days for 3 weeks or more
you have other symptoms, like food getting stuck in your throat, frequently being sick or losing weight for no reason
A GP can provide stronger treatments and help rule out any more serious causes of your symptoms.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
A GP may prescribe a medicine called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) that reduces how much acid your stomach makes. PPIs include:
omeprazole
lansoprazole
You'll usually need to take this type of medicine for 4 or 8 weeks, depending on how serious your acid reflux is.
Important
Go back to the GP if your symptoms return after stopping your medicine. You may need a long-term prescription.
Tests and surgery for heartburn and acid reflux
If medicines do not help or your symptoms are severe, a GP may refer you to a specialist for:
tests to find out what's causing your symptoms, such as a gastroscopy (where a thin tube with a camera is passed down your throat)
an operation on your stomach to stop acid reflux – called a laparoscopic fundoplication
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 09 September 2020
Next review due: 09 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright