Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Farting (flatulence)
Farting, also known as flatulence or wind, is normal. There are things you can do if you fart a lot or it's smelly. Sometimes it can be a sign of a health condition.
Check if your farting is normal
Farting is usually nothing to worry about. Everyone farts, some people more than others. The average is 5 to 15 times a day.
What's normal is different for everyone. If you notice a change or it's affecting your life, there are things you can do.
Things you can do to cut down excessive or smelly farts
Do
eat smaller meals, more often
drink or chew food slowly
exercise regularly to improve how your body digests food
drink peppermint tea
Don’t
do not chew gum, smoke, or suck pen tops or hard sweets to avoid swallowing air
do not wear loose-fitting dentures
do not eat too many foods that are difficult to digest and make you fart
Food and drinks that can make you fart
A pharmacist can help with excessive or smelly farts
Speak to a pharmacist about excessive or smelly farts.
They might be able to tell you:
if you can buy something to help – for example, charcoal tablets or special underwear and pads that absorb smells
if you should see a GP
Find your nearest pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
self help and pharmacy treatments have not worked and farting is affecting your life
you have a stomach ache or bloating that will not go away or comes back
you keep getting constipation or diarrhoea
you have lost weight without trying
there's blood in your poo
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What causes excessive or smelly farts
Excessive or smelly farts can be caused when you swallow air or eat foods that are difficult to digest. It can also sometimes be a sign of a health condition.
Do not self-diagnose. See a GP if you're worried about your farting.
Possible causes of farting
Symptoms Possible causes
Difficulty pooing Constipation
Bloating, stomach pain with diarrhoea or constipation that comes and goes Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Indigestion, constipation, diarrhoea and stomach pain Coeliac disease
Diarrhoea, bloating, stomach pain, feeling sick Lactose intolerance
Excessive or smelly wind can also be a side effect of some medicines, including:
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), like ibuprofen
some laxatives
antifungal medicines
statins
Do not stop or change your medicine without speaking to a GP first.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 06 August 2019
Next review due: 06 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright