Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Eye injuries
Minor eye injuries, such as shampoo or dust in your eye, often get better on their own within a day. Get medical help if you have a chemical in your eye or something pierces it.
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if:
a strong chemical, such as oven cleaner or bleach, is in your eye – keep rinsing your eye with water while waiting for medical help
a sharp object has pierced your eye
something has hit your eye at high speed – for example, while using power tools or mowing the lawn
there are any changes to your sight after an eye injury
you have a headache, high temperature or sensitivity to light
you're feeling sick or being sick after an eye injury
you cannot move your eye or keep it open
blood or pus is coming from your eye
Find your nearest A&E
How to treat an eye injury at home
Do
wash your eye with clean water if there's something in it
follow the advice on the packaging if any cosmetics or household products get in your eyes
take painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen to help ease any pain or discomfort
Don’t
do not try to remove any object that's pierced your eye
do not touch or rub your eye until it's better
do not wear make-up around your eye until it's better
do not wear contact lenses until your eye is better
How to wash your eye
You should:
use clean water (not hot) – this can be from a tap, shower or bottled water if you're not at home
hold your eye open
run lots of water over your eyeball for at least 20 minutes
Make sure the flow of water is not too strong.
Urgent advice:
See a GP, optician or call 111 if:
your eye is not getting better after 24 hours
you're worried about your injury
Other eye injuries
There is separate information about:
what to do if you have a black eye
what to do if you have a red eye
Page last reviewed: 28 June 2019
Next review due: 28 June 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright