Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Pre-eclampsia
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Pre-eclampsia is a condition that affects some pregnant women, usually during the second half of pregnancy (from 20 weeks) or soon after their baby is delivered.
Important:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update
If you're well, it's really important you go to all your appointments and scans for the health of you and your baby.
If you're pregnant, hospitals and clinics are making sure it's safe for you to go to appointments.
If you get symptoms of COVID-19, or you're unwell with something other than COVID-19, speak to your midwife or maternity team. They will advise you what to do.
Find out more about pregnancy and COVID-19
Symptoms of pre-eclampsia
Early signs of pre-eclampsia include having high blood pressure (hypertension) and protein in your urine (proteinuria). 
It's unlikely that you'll notice these signs, but they should be picked up during your routine antenatal appointments.
In some cases, further symptoms can develop, including:
severe headache
vision problems, such as blurring or flashing
pain just below the ribs
vomiting
sudden swelling of the face, hands or feet
If you notice any symptoms of pre-eclampsia, seek medical advice immediately by calling your midwife, GP surgery or NHS 111.
Although many cases are mild, the condition can lead to serious complications for both mother and baby if it's not monitored and treated. 
The earlier pre-eclampsia is diagnosed and monitored, the better the outlook for mother and baby.
Video: what is pre-eclampsia and what are the warning signs?
In this video, a midwife explains the warning signs of pre-eclampsia.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 September 2020
Media review due: 1 September 2023
Who's affected?
There are a number of things that can increase your chances of developing pre-eclampsia, such as:
having diabetes, high blood pressure or kidney disease before you were pregnant
having an autoimmune condition, such as lupus or antiphospholipid syndrome
having high blood pressure or pre-eclampsia in a previous pregnancy
Other things that can slightly increase your chances of developing pre-eclampsia include:
a family history of pre-eclampsia
being 40 years old or more
it's more than 10 years since your last pregnancy
expecting multiple babies (twins or triplets)
having a body mass index (BMI) of 35 or more
If you have 2 or more of these together, your chances are higher.
If you're thought to be at a high risk of developing pre-eclampsia, you may be advised to take a 75 to 150mg daily dose of aspirin from the 12th week of pregnancy until your baby is born.
What causes pre-eclampsia?
Although the exact cause of pre-eclampsia is not known, it's thought to occur when there's a problem with the placenta, the organ that links the baby's blood supply to the mother's.
Treating pre-eclampsia
If you're diagnosed with pre-eclampsia, you should be referred for an assessment by a specialist, usually in hospital.
While in hospital, you'll be monitored closely to determine how severe the condition is and whether a hospital stay is needed.
The only way to cure pre-eclampsia is to deliver the baby, so you'll usually be monitored regularly until it's possible for your baby to be delivered.
This will normally be at around 37 to 38 weeks of pregnancy, but it may be earlier in more severe cases.
At this point, labour may be started artificially (induced) or you may have a caesarean section.
You'll be offered medicine to lower your blood pressure while you wait for your baby to be delivered.
Complications
Although most cases of pre-eclampsia cause no problems and improve soon after the baby is delivered, there's a risk of serious complications that can affect both the mother and her baby.
There's a risk that the mother will develop fits called "eclampsia". These fits can be life threatening for the mother and baby, but they're rare.
Page last reviewed: 28 September 2021
Next review due: 28 September 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright