Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Beta blockers
Beta blockers work mainly by slowing down the heart. They do this by blocking the action of hormones like adrenaline.
Beta blockers usually come as tablets.
They are prescription-only medicines, which means they can only be prescribed by a GP or another suitably qualified healthcare professional.
Commonly used beta blockers include:
atenolol (also called Tenormin)
bisoprolol (also called Cardicor or Emcor)
carvedilol
labetalol (also called Trandate)
metoprolol (also called Betaloc or Lopresor)
propranolol (also called Inderal or Angilol)
sotalol
Uses for beta blockers
Beta blockers may be used to treat:
angina – chest pain caused by narrowing of the arteries supplying the heart
heart failure – failure of the heart to pump enough blood around the body
atrial fibrillation – irregular heartbeat
heart attack – an emergency where the blood supply to the heart is suddenly blocked
high blood pressure – when other medicines have been tried, or in addition to other medicines
Less commonly, beta blockers are used to prevent migraine or treat:
an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism)
anxiety 
tremor
glaucoma – as eyedrops
There are several types of beta blocker, and each one has its own characteristics. The type prescribed for you will depend on your health condition.
Who can take beta blockers
Beta blockers are not suitable for everyone. To make sure they are safe for you, tell your doctor before starting a beta blocker if you have:
had an allergic reaction to a beta blocker or any other medicine in the past
low blood pressure or a slow heart rate
serious blood circulation problems in your limbs (such as Raynaud's phenomenon, which may make your fingers and toes tingle or turn pale or blue)
metabolic acidosis – when there's too much acid in your blood
lung disease or asthma
Tell your doctor if you're trying to get pregnant, are already pregnant or breastfeeding.
It's important not to stop taking beta blockers without seeking your doctor's advice. In some cases suddenly stopping the medicine may make your health condition worse.
Cautions with other medicines
There are some medicines that may interfere with the way that beta blockers, including beta blocker eyedrops, work.
Tell your doctor if you're taking:
other medicines for high blood pressure. The combination with beta blockers can sometimes lower your blood pressure too much. This may make you feel dizzy or faint
other medicines for an irregular heartbeat such as amiodarone or flecainide
other medicines that can lower your blood pressure. These include some antidepressants, nitrates (for chest pain), baclofen (a muscle relaxant), medicines for an enlarged prostate gland like tamsulosin, or Parkinson's disease medicines such as levodopa
medicines for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
medicines for diabetes, particularly insulin – beta blockers may make it more difficult to recognise the warning signs of low blood sugar
medicines to treat nose or sinus congestion, or other cold remedies (including those you can buy in the pharmacy)
medicines for allergies, such as ephedrine, noradrenaline or adrenaline
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen. These medicines may increase your blood pressure, so it's best to keep them to a minimum
Side effects of beta blockers
Most people taking beta blockers have either no or very mild side effects that become less troublesome with time.
Contact your GP if you're having symptoms that bother you or last more than a few days.
Side effects commonly reported by people taking beta blockers include:
feeling tired, dizzy or lightheaded (these can be signs of a slow heart rate)
cold fingers or toes (beta blockers may affect the blood supply to your hands and feet)
difficulties sleeping or nightmares
feeling sick
It happens rarely, but some people have serious side effects when taking beta blockers.
Tell a doctor straight away if you have:
shortness of breath with a cough that gets worse when you exercise (like walking up stairs), swollen ankles or legs, chest pain, or an irregular heartbeat – these are signs of heart problems
shortness of breath, wheezing and tightening of your chest – these can be signs of lung problems
yellow skin or the whites of your eyes turn yellow – these can be signs of liver problems
These are not all the side effects of beta blockers. For a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.
You can report suspected side effects using the Yellow Card Scheme.
For more information on the side effects of beta blockers, read about the specific medicine you take in our Medicines A to Z.
Missed or extra doses
Most beta blockers are taken once a day, apart from certain beta blockers that are used during pregnancy and Sotalol, which is given 2 or 3 times a day.
What if I forget to take it?
If you forget to take a dose of your beta blocker, take it as soon as you remember, unless it is nearly time for your next dose. In this case, just leave out the missed dose and take your next dose as normal.
Never take 2 doses at the same time. Never take an extra dose to make up for a forgotten one.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.
What if I take too much?
An overdose of beta blockers can slow down your heart rate and make it difficult to breathe. It can also cause dizziness and trembling.
The amount of beta blocker that can lead to an overdose varies from person to person.
Call your doctor or go to A&E straight away if you take too much of your beta blocker.
Page last reviewed: 16 July 2019
Next review due: 16 July 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright