Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Nasal and sinus cancer
Nasal and sinus cancer is a rare cancer that affects the nasal cavity (the space behind your nose) and the sinuses (small air-filled cavities inside your nose, cheekbones and forehead).
Nasal and sinus cancer is different from cancer of the area where the nose and throat connect.
This is called nasopharyngeal cancer.
Credit:
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: coronavirus and cancer
Symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer
The most common symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer are:
a blocked nose that does not go away and usually only affects 1 side
nosebleeds
a decreased sense of smell
mucus running from your nose – this can be bloody
mucus draining into the back of your nose and throat
These symptoms can be similar to more common and less serious conditions, such as a cold or sinusitis.
At a later stage, symptoms can include:
pain or numbness in the face, particularly in the upper cheek, that does not go away
swollen glands in the neck
partial loss of vision or double vision
a bulging eye
a watering eye that does not go away
pain or pressure in 1 ear
a persistent lump or growth on your face, nose or roof of your mouth
When to see a GP
See a GP if you notice any unusual or persistent symptoms.
It's very unlikely they'll be caused by nasal or sinus cancer, but it's worth getting them checked out.
If a GP thinks you might need some tests to find out what's causing your symptoms, you'll usually be referred to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) consultant at a hospital.
Diagnosing nasal and sinus cancer
Tests you may have to help diagnose nasal and sinus cancer include:
a nasal endoscopy (nasoendoscopy) – where a long, thin, flexible tube with a camera and light at the end is inserted into your nose to examine the area; this can be uncomfortable, so before the procedure you'll be asked whether you'd like anaesthetic sprayed on the back of your throat
a biopsy – where a small sample of tissue is removed and examined; this may be done during an endoscopy
a fine needle aspiration – where fluid and cells are taken from a lymph node using a needle to see if the cancer has spread
If you're diagnosed with nasal and sinus cancer, you may have a CT scan, MRI scan, PET scan or ultrasound scan to help stage and grade the cancer.
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the stages and grades of different types of nasal and sinus cancer.
Risk groups for nasal and sinus cancer
Several factors are known to increase the risk of developing nasal and sinus cancer.
These include:
prolonged exposure to certain substances through your work – including wood dust, leather dust, cloth fibres, nickel, chromium and formaldehyde
smoking – the more you smoke, the higher your risk of developing several types of cancer, including nasal and sinus cancer
human papillomavirus (HPV) – a group of viruses that affect the skin and moist membranes, such as the mouth and throat
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the risks and causes of nasal and sinus cancer.
Treatments for nasal and sinus cancer
The treatment recommended for you will depend on several factors, including the stage at which the cancer was diagnosed, how far it's spread, and your general level of health.
Treatment may include:
surgery to remove a tumour – this can be performed through open surgery or as keyhole surgery through the nose (endoscopic microsurgery)
radiotherapy – where high-energy radiation is used to kill the cancerous cells, shrink a tumour before surgery, or destroy small pieces of a tumour that may be left after surgery
chemotherapy – where medicine is used to help shrink or slow down the growth of a tumour, or reduce the risk of the cancer returning after surgery
If you smoke, it's important that you give up.
Smoking increases your risk of cancer returning and may cause you to have more side effects from treatment.
Your treatment will be organised by a head and neck cancer multidisciplinary team (MDT), who'll discuss the treatment options with you. 
A combination of treatments will often be recommended.
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the treatment of nasal and sinus cancer.
Outlook for nasal and sinus cancer
There are many different types of cancer that can affect the nasal cavity and sinuses.
The outlook varies, depending on the specific type of nasal and sinus cancer you have, its exact location, how far it's spread before being diagnosed and treated, and your overall level of health and fitness.
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the outlook for nasal and sinus cancer.
Help and support
Being diagnosed with nasal and sinus cancer can be a shock and may be difficult to come to terms with. Everyone reacts differently.
Talking about how you feel with your family and friends can be a big help.
But if you're unable to talk with family or friends, other sources of help and support are available.
For example, Cancer Research UK has nurses you can speak to by calling 0808 800 4040 (freephone), 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday.
Find out more
Cancer Research UK: coping with a diagnosis of nasal and sinus cancer
Cancer Research UK: living with nasal and sinus cancer
Page last reviewed: 03 December 2021
Next review due: 03 December 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright