Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Arterial thrombosis
Arterial thrombosis is a blood clot in an artery, which can be very serious because it can stop blood reaching important organs.
Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the rest of the body and the heart muscle.
Symptoms and risks of arterial thrombosis
A blood clot does not usually have any symptoms until it blocks the flow of blood to part of the body.
This can cause several serious problems, including:
a heart attack, when blood flow to the heart muscle is suddenly blocked, causing chest pain, shortness of breath and dizziness
a stroke, when blood flow to the brain is cut off; the main symptoms are one side of the face dropping, weakness in one side of the body and slurred speech
a transient ischaemic attack (TIA) or "mini-stroke", when blood flow to the brain is temporarily blocked, causing short-lived stroke symptoms
critical limb ischaemia (a complication of peripheral arterial disease), when the blood supply to a limb is blocked, causing it to become painful, discoloured (either pale or blue) and cold
These conditions are all medical emergencies. Get medical help straight away by calling 999 if you or someone in your care is experiencing these symptoms.
Causes of arterial thrombosis
Arterial thrombosis usually affects people whose arteries are clogged with fatty deposits. This is known as atherosclerosis.
These deposits cause the arteries to harden and narrow over time and increase the risk of blood clots.
The following can increase your risk of developing atherosclerosis:
getting older
smoking
an unhealthy diet
a lack of exercise
being overweight or obese
regularly drinking excessive amounts of alcohol
other health conditions, including high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes
a family history of atherosclerosis
being of south Asian, African or African-Caribbean descent
Sometimes arterial thrombosis can be due to a condition that makes your blood more likely to clot, such as atrial fibrillation or antiphospholipid syndrome.
Reduce your risk of arterial thrombosis
It's not possible to prevent blood clots entirely, but you can reduce your risk by lowering your risk of atherosclerosis.
The main things you can do are:
stop smoking
eat a healthy, balanced diet
exercise regularly
maintain a healthy weight – find advice about losing weight
cut down on your alcohol consumption
If you're at a high risk of getting a blood clot, your doctor may also recommend taking medicines such as:
statins to manage high cholesterol
medicines for high blood pressure
medicines to reduce the risk of your blood clotting. For example, an anticoagulant such as warfarin and an antiplatelet such as low-dose aspirin or clopidogrel
Treatments for arterial thrombosis
If you develop arterial thrombosis, it may need to be treated with medicine or surgery.
Treatments include:
injections of a medicine called a thrombolytic which can dissolve some blood clots
an operation to remove the clot (embolectomy)
an operation to widen the affected artery – for example, an angioplasty (where a hollow tube is placed inside the artery to hold it open)
surgery to divert blood around the blocked artery – for example, a coronary artery bypass graft (where a blood vessel taken from another part of the body is used to bypass a blockage in the artery that supplies the heart muscle)
Other types of blood clot
As well as arterial thrombosis, there are several other types of blood clot, including:
venous thromboembolism (VTE) – a blood clot in a vein
DVT (deep vein thrombosis) – a blood clot in one of the deep veins in the body, usually in the leg
embolism – where the blood flow in an artery is blocked by a foreign body; this can be a blood clot or something else such as an air bubble
pulmonary embolism – a blood clot in the pulmonary artery, which transports blood from the heart to the lungs
Page last reviewed: 09 January 2020
Next review due: 09 January 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright