Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a common virus that is usually harmless. Sometimes it causes problems in babies if you get it during pregnancy (congenital CMV).
What is cytomegalovirus (CMV)?
CMV is related to the herpes virus that causes cold sores and chickenpox.
Once you have the virus, it stays in your body for the rest of your life.
Your immune system usually controls the virus and most people do not realise they have it.
But CMV can cause serious health problems in some babies who get the virus before birth, and in people who have a weakened immune system.
Symptoms of cytomegalovirus (CMV)
CMV does not usually cause symptoms.
Some people get flu-like symptoms the first time they get CMV, including:
a high temperature
aching muscles
tiredness
skin rash
feeling sick
sore throat
swollen glands
If you do have symptoms, they usually get better without treatment within about 3 weeks.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have flu-like symptoms and:
you're pregnant
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because you're having chemotherapy
The GP may arrange tests to find out if you've been infected with CMV.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How cytomegalovirus (CMV) is spread
CMV is mainly spread through close contact with someone who already has CMV.
It can be passed on through sexual contact and contact with other body fluids including saliva, blood, breast milk, tears, pee and poo.
CMV can only be passed on when it's "active". The virus is active when:
you get CMV for the first time – young children often get CMV for the first time at nursery
the virus has "re-activated" – because you have a weakened immune system
you've been re-infected – with a different type (strain) of CMV
Pregnant women can pass an "active" CMV infection on to their unborn baby. This is known as congenital CMV.
How cytomegalovirus (CMV) is treated
If CMV is not causing symptoms, you or your baby may not need any treatment.
There's currently no treatment for CMV in pregnancy, but in most cases the virus does not cause any problems for your baby.
Antiviral medicine may be used to treat:
babies diagnosed with congenital CMV after they're born
people with a weakened immune system
people who have a stem cell transplant
Treatment weakens the virus and reduces the chance of serious problems, but it does not cure the CMV infection.
Babies born with congenital CMV may have tests to check their kidneys, liver, brain, eyes and hearing, and regular follow-up appointments until they're around age 5.
How to reduce the chance of getting cytomegalovirus (CMV) in pregnancy
The best way to reduce the chance of getting CMV during pregnancy is to:
wash your hands using soap and water – especially after changing nappies, feeding young children or wiping their nose
regularly wash toys or other items that may have young children's saliva or urine on them
avoid sharing food, cutlery and drinking glasses or putting a child's dummy in your mouth
avoid kissing young children on their mouth
There's currently no vaccine for CMV.
Important
Pregnant women who work closely with children or already have a young family are more at risk of getting CMV.
Information:
Get more information about cytomegalovirus (CMV):
UK charity CMV Action provides information and support
Page last reviewed: 13 October 2020
Next review due: 13 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright