Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Knee pain
Knee pain can often be treated at home. You should start to feel better in a few days. Call 111 if the pain is very bad.
How to ease knee pain and swelling
Try these things at first:
put as little weight as possible on your knee – for example, avoid standing for a long time
use an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel) on your knee for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
take paracetamol
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
knee pain does not improve within a few weeks
your knee locks, painfully clicks or gives way – painless clicking is normal
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
your knee is very painful
you cannot move your knee or put any weight on it
your knee is badly swollen or has changed shape
you have a very high temperature, feel hot and shivery, and have redness or heat around your knee – this can be a sign of infection
111 will tell you what to do. They can tell you the right place to get help if you need to see someone.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Treatment from a GP
A doctor can suggest treatment based on what's causing your knee pain.
They might:
prescribe medicine or physiotherapy
refer you to hospital for a scan or specialist treatment (for example, surgery)
Common causes of knee pain
Knee pain can be a symptom of many different conditions.
This information might give you an idea of what the cause might be. But do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Knee pain after an injury
Possible causes
Knee symptoms Possible cause
Pain after overstretching, overusing or twisting, often during exercise Sprains and strains
Pain between your kneecap and shin, often caused by repetitive running or jumping Tendonitis
Unstable, gives way when you try to stand, unable to straighten, may hear a popping sound during injury Torn ligament, tendon or meniscus, cartilage damage
Teenagers and young adults with pain and swelling below kneecap Osgood-Schlatter's disease
Kneecap changes shape after a collision or sudden change in direction Dislocated kneecap
Knee pain with no obvious injury
Causes of knee pain without injury
Knee symptoms Possible cause
Pain and stiffness in both knees, mild swelling, more common in older people Osteoarthritis
Warm and red, kneeling or bending makes pain and swelling worse Bursitis
Swelling, warmth, bruising, more likely while taking anticoagulants Bleeding in the joint
Hot and red, sudden attacks of very bad pain Gout or septic arthritis
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 12 January 2021
Next review due: 12 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright