Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
West Nile virus
West Nile virus (WNV) is spread by mosquitoes in many countries (but not in the UK). There are usually no symptoms and it gets better without treatment.
West Nile virus rarely affects UK travellers
Very few people coming back to the UK have the virus. No one has got the virus while in the UK.
You can check the area you're travelling to on the TravelHealthPro website.
Visiting high-risk areas for WNV
There's no vaccine for WNV. You should avoid mosquito bites when visiting high-risk areas by using insect sprays and mosquito nets.
Symptoms of WNV
Most people with WNV have no symptoms.
Some people develop mild flu-like symptoms, a skin rash and may feel sick.
The infection usually goes away on its own without treatment.
The virus is not contagious. You only get it from being bitten by an infected mosquito.
People aged over 50 or with another condition, such as cancer, diabetes or hypertension, are more at risk of getting seriously ill.
Signs of a severe infection can include flu-like symptoms and also:
muscle weakness
confusion
fits (seizures)
Severe WNV infections are treated in hospital. In rare cases, it can lead to meningitis and encephalitis.
Non-urgent advice:
Get medical advice if:
you develop symptoms of WNV while you're travelling
Check your travel insurance for how to get medical help while you're away or look up the country you're visiting on GOV.UK.
See a GP if you notice symptoms when you get home
make sure you say where you've been travelling
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Page last reviewed: 23 November 2020
Next review due: 23 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright