Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Glue ear
Glue ear is where the empty middle part of the ear canal fills up with fluid. This can cause temporary hearing loss. It usually clears up within 3 months, but see a GP about any hearing problems.
Check if it's glue ear
The most common symptom of glue ear is temporary hearing loss. It can affect both ears at the same time.
Other symptoms may include:
earache or ear pain
hearing sounds like ringing or buzzing (tinnitus)
Glue ear is much more common in children, but adults with glue ear have the same symptoms.
Other conditions that cause ear pain
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if your child has hearing problems
Your child may be struggling to hear if they often:
speak loudly
are difficult to understand
ask people to repeat what they say
ask for the TV or music to be turned up loud
struggle to hear people far away
become easily distracted when people are talking
seem tired and irritable because it's harder to listen
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP should be able to tell if it's glue ear by looking for fluid inside the ear.
They'll use a small scope with a light and magnifying glass. This should not be painful.
If your child has had glue ear for more than 3 months, they may be referred to a specialist for hearing tests.
Hearing tests can help find out how severe any hearing loss is and what's causing it.
Treatment for glue ear from a GP
Glue ear is not always treated. The GP will usually wait to see if the symptoms get better on their own.
This is because there's no effective medicine for glue ear, and it often clears up on its own within 3 months.
Your child may be monitored for up to a year in case their symptoms change or get worse.
The GP may suggest trying a treatment called autoinflation while waiting for symptoms to improve. Autoinflation can help fluid in the ear to drain.
It's done by either:
blowing up a special balloon using 1 nostril at a time
swallowing while holding the nostrils closed
As autoinflation has to be done several times a day, it's not usually recommended for children under 3 years old.
Antibiotics may be prescribed if glue ear causes an ear infection.
Hospital treatment for glue ear
Your child may be referred to a specialist in hospital if:
glue ear symptoms are affecting their learning and development
they already had severe hearing loss before glue ear
they have Down's syndrome or a cleft lip and palate, as glue ear is less likely to get better by itself
The 2 main treatments are temporary hearing aids or grommets (small tubes implanted in the ear).
Occasionally, surgery may be recommended to remove some glands at the back of the nose (adenoids). This is known as an adenoidectomy.
The specialist in hospital will help you decide on the best treatment option.
Grommets for treating glue ear
A grommet is a small tube that's placed in your child's ear during surgery. It drains fluid away and keeps the eardrum open.
The grommet should fall out naturally within 6 to 12 months as your child's ear gets better.
If your child needs grommets, you might find these links useful:
Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH): treatment of glue ear with grommets
National Deaf Children's Society (NDCS): Harvey gets grommets
Video: What is glue ear?
This animation explains in detail what glue ear is, what causes it and how it's treated.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 April 2021
Media review due: 1 April 2024
Page last reviewed: 28 July 2020
Next review due: 28 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright