Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Craniosynostosis
Craniosynostosis is a rare condition where a baby's skull does not grow properly and their head becomes an unusual shape. It does not always need to be treated, but may need surgery in some cases.
Is my baby's head a normal shape?
Babies' heads come in all shapes and sizes. It's normal for their head to be a slightly unusual shape. It will often get better as they grow.
But your baby may have a problem like craniosynostosis if:
their head is long and narrow – like a rugby ball
their forehead is pointy or triangular
1 side of their head is flattened or bulging out
the soft spot on the top of their head (fontanelle) disappears before they're 1 year old
their head seems small compared with their body
If the problem is mild, it may not be noticeable until your child is older.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you're worried about the shape of your baby's or child's head
They can check if it could be craniosynostosis or a common problem in babies called flat head syndrome. This is not serious and usually gets better by itself.
Ask for an urgent appointment if your child also has:
constant headaches
problems with their vision – like blurred or double vision
a decline in their school performance
These problems can occur in young children with mild craniosynostosis if their skull puts pressure on their brain.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
The GP will examine your child's head. They may also take some measurements to see if it's an unusual size for your child's age.
If they think it could be craniosynostosis, they may refer you to a specialist centre for more tests, like X-rays or scans.
Information:
There are 4 specialist NHS centres for craniosynostosis:
Alder Hey Children's Hospital in Liverpool
Birmingham Children's Hospital
Great Ormond Street Hospital in London
John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford
Staff at the centre can check if your child does have craniosynostosis, what type it is and if it might need to be treated.
Types of craniosynostosis
Treatment for craniosynostosis
Craniosynostosis does not always need to be treated. Your child may just have regular check-ups to monitor it.
Surgery may be recommended if:
it's likely to affect how your child's brain grows or lead to problems like low self-esteem as they get older
your child has symptoms caused by pressure on their brain, such as headaches
it's also affecting their face and causing problems like breathing difficulties
Surgery usually involves making a cut across the top of your child's head, removing and reshaping the affected parts of their skull, and then fixing them back in place.
It's done under general anaesthetic (they're asleep). Your child may need to stay in hospital for up to a week afterwards.
Long-lasting effects of craniosynostosis
Most children do not have any lasting health problems. They may have a scar across the top of their head if they had surgery, but this will be hidden by their hair.
Your child will have regular check-ups to see how they're doing. These may be every few weeks at first but will become less frequent as they get older.
If your child has certain types of craniosynostosis, surgery cannot always fully correct the shape of their head and they may need ongoing care.
Information:
The charity Headlines can provide more information and support for people with craniosynostosis and their families.
Page last reviewed: 31 December 2020
Next review due: 30 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright