Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Early or delayed puberty
Puberty is when a child's body begins to develop and change as they become an adult.
Signs of puberty include girls developing breasts and starting periods, and boys developing a larger penis and testicles, a deeper voice and a more muscular appearance.
The average age for girls to start puberty is 11, while for boys the average age is 12.
But it's perfectly normal for puberty to begin at any point between the ages of 8 and 13 in girls and 9 and 14 in boys.
There's not usually any need to worry if puberty does not start around the average age, but it's a good idea to speak to your GP for advice if it starts before 8 or has not started by around 14.
In some cases, early puberty or delayed puberty could be a sign of an underlying condition that may need to be treated.
Early puberty
Early puberty, also called precocious puberty, is when:
girls have signs of puberty before 8 years of age
boys have signs of puberty before 9 years of age
Some girls and boys may develop certain signs of puberty at a young age, but not others.
For example, girls may start periods before the age of 8 but have no breast development.
See your GP if this happens to your child.
Causes of early puberty
It's not always clear what causes early puberty. It may just be a tendency that runs in your family.
Occasionally it can be caused by:
a problem in the brain, such as a tumour
damage to the brain as a result of an infection, surgery or radiotherapy
a problem with the ovaries or thyroid gland
a genetic disorder, such as McCune-Albright syndrome
Early puberty mostly affects girls and often has no obvious cause. It's less common in boys and may be more likely to be associated with an underlying problem.
Tests and treatments for early puberty
Your GP may refer you to a specialist if they think there could be an underlying cause that needs to be investigated.
Tests that may be carried out include:
a blood test to check hormone levels
a hand X-ray to help determine likely adult height
an ultrasound scan or MRI scan to check for problems such as tumours
Early puberty can be treated by:
treating any underlying cause
using medication to reduce hormone levels and pause sexual development for a few years
Treatment with medication is usually only recommended if it's thought early puberty will cause emotional or physical problems, such as a very short stature or early periods in girls, which may cause significant distress.
Delayed puberty
Delayed puberty is when:
boys have no signs of testicular development by 14 years of age
girls have not started to develop breasts by 13 years of age, or they have developed breasts but their periods have not started by 15
Causes of delayed puberty
It's not always clear what causes delayed puberty. It may just be a tendency that runs in your family. Delayed puberty is generally more common in boys.
Occasionally it can be caused by:
a long-term illness, such as cystic fibrosis, diabetes or kidney disease
malnutrition, possibly from an eating disorder or a condition such as cystic fibrosis or coeliac disease
a problem with the ovaries, testes, thyroid gland or pituitary gland
a disorder of sexual development, such as androgen insensitivity syndrome
a genetic condition, such as Kallman syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome
Tests and treatments for delayed puberty
Your GP may refer you to a specialist if they think there could be an underlying cause of delayed puberty that needs to be investigated.
Tests that may be carried out include a blood test to check hormone levels, a hand X-ray to help determine likely adult height, and an ultrasound or MRI scan to check for problems with glands or organs.
Delayed puberty can be treated by:
treating any underlying cause
using medication for a few months to increase hormone levels and trigger the start of puberty 
Treatment with medication is usually recommended if the lack of development is causing problems, such as significant distress.
Page last reviewed: 11 March 2019
Next review due: 11 March 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright