Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Croup
Croup is a common childhood condition that mainly affects babies' and young children's airways. It's usually mild, but it's important to call NHS 111 if you think your child has croup. They may need treatment.
Important:
Could it be coronavirus (COVID-19)?
A new, continuous cough could be COVID-19.
Get advice about symptoms of COVID-19 and what to do
Check if your child has croup
These are the symptoms of croup:
a barking cough that sounds like a seal (you can search online to hear examples)
a hoarse voice
difficulty breathing
a rasping sound when breathing in
Your child will usually have cold-like symptoms to begin with, such as a temperature, runny nose and cough.
Croup symptoms usually come on after a few days and are often worse at night.
If you're not sure it's croup
Non-urgent advice:
Call NHS 111 or see a GP if :
you think your child may have croup – the doctor may give your child medicine to shorten the illness
you're worried
your child is getting worse
they're no better after 48 hours
Occasionally, your child may be referred to hospital if they're more seriously ill or they're under the age of 3 months.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How to look after a child with croup at home
Croup usually gets better on its own within 48 hours.
During this time:
Do
stay calm
sit your child upright
comfort them if they're distressed (crying can make the symptoms worse)
give them plenty of fluids
Don’t
do not put your child in a steamy room or get them to inhale steam
do not give them cough or cold medicines
Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
your child is struggling to breathe (you may see their tummy sucking inwards or their breathing sounds different)
their skin or lips start to look very pale or blue
they're unusually quiet and still
they suddenly get a very high temperature or become very ill
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 18 September 2020
Next review due: 18 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright