Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Brain tumours
A brain tumour is a growth of cells in the brain that multiplies in an abnormal, uncontrollable way.
Grades and types of brain tumour
Brain tumours are graded according to how fast they grow and how likely they are to grow back after treatment.
Grade 1 and 2 tumours are low grade, and grade 3 and 4 tumours are high grade.
There are 2 main types of brain tumours:
non-cancerous (benign) brain tumours – these are low grade (grade 1 or 2), which means they grow slowly and are less likely to return after treatment
cancerous (malignant) brain tumours – these are high grade (grade 3 or 4) and either start in the brain (primary tumours) or spread into the brain from elsewhere (secondary tumours); they're more likely to grow back after treatment
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about specific types of brain tumours.
Symptoms of a brain tumour
The symptoms of a brain tumour vary depending on the exact part of the brain affected.
Common symptoms include:
headaches
seizures (fits)
persistently feeling sick (nausea), being sick (vomiting) and drowsiness
mental or behavioural changes, such as memory problems or changes in personality
progressive weakness or paralysis on one side of the body
vision or speech problems
Sometimes you may not have any symptoms to begin with, or they may develop very slowly over time.
When to see a GP
See a GP if you have these types of symptoms, particularly if you have a headache that feels different from the type of headache you usually get, or if headaches are getting worse.
You may not have a brain tumour, but these types of symptoms should be checked.
If the GP cannot identify a more likely cause of your symptoms, they may refer you to a doctor who specialises in the brain and nervous system (neurologist) for further assessment and tests, such as a brain scan.
Who's affected
Brain tumours can affect people of any age, including children, although they tend to be more common in older adults.
More than 11,000 people are diagnosed with a primary brain tumour in the UK each year, of which about half are cancerous. Many others are diagnosed with a secondary brain tumour.
Causes and risks
The cause of most brain tumours is unknown, but there are several risk factors that may increase your chances of developing a brain tumour.
Risk factors include:
age – the risk of getting a brain tumour increases with age (most brain tumours happen in older adults aged 85 to 89), although some types of brain tumour are more common in children
radiation – exposure to radiation accounts for a very small number of brain tumours; some types of brain tumours are more common in people who have had radiotherapy, CT scans or X-rays of the head
family history and genetic conditions – some genetic conditions are known to increase the risk of getting a brain tumour, including tuberous sclerosis, neurofibromatosis type 1, neurofibromatosis type 2 and Turner syndrome
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the risks and causes of brain tumours.
Treating brain tumours
If you have a brain tumour, your treatment will depend on:
the type of tumour
where it is in your brain
how big it is and how far it's spread
how abnormal the cells are
your overall health and fitness
Treatments for brain tumours include:
steroids
medicines to help with symptoms
surgery
radiotherapy
chemotherapy
After being diagnosed with a brain tumour, steroids may be prescribed to help reduce swelling around the tumour.
Other medicines can be used to help with other symptoms of brain tumours, such as anti-epileptic medicines for seizures and painkillers for headaches.
Surgery is often used to remove brain tumours. The aim is to remove as much abnormal tissue as safely as possible.
It's not always possible to remove all of a tumour, so further treatment with radiotherapy or chemotherapy may be needed to treat any abnormal cells left behind.
Treatment for non-cancerous tumours is often successful and a full recovery is possible.
Sometimes there's a small chance the tumour could return, so you may need regular follow-up appointments to monitor this.
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about treatment for brain tumours.
Outlook
If you have a brain tumour, your outlook will depend on several factors, including:
your age
the type of tumour you have
where it is in your brain
how effective the treatment is
your general health
Survival rates are difficult to predict because brain tumours are uncommon and there are many different types.
Your doctor will be able to give you more information about your outlook.
Generally, around 15 out of every 100 people with a cancerous brain tumour will survive for 10 years or more after being diagnosed.
The Cancer Research UK website has more information about survival rates for different types of brain tumour.
Page last reviewed: 03 February 2020
Next review due: 03 February 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright