Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Blepharitis
Blepharitis causes swollen, itchy eyelids. It’s not usually serious and can often be treated by washing your eyelids every day.
Check if you have blepharitis
Blepharitis symptoms often come and go.
Symptoms of blepharitis include:
sore eyelids
itchy eyes
a gritty feeling in the eyes
flakes or crusts around the roots of the eyelashes
eyelids sticking together in the morning when you wake up
Credit:
If you're not sure it's blepharitis
Read more about eyelid problems.
Things you can do to treat and prevent blepharitis
Do
clean your eyelids twice a day to start with and then once a day as your symptoms improve
continue to clean your eyes, even if your symptoms clear up
Don’t
do not wear contact lenses while you have symptoms
do not use eye makeup, especially eyeliner and mascara, while you have symptoms
How to clean your eyes
Soak a clean flannel or cotton wool in warm water and place it on your closed eyelid for 5 to 10 minutes.
Gently massage your eyelids for around 30 seconds.
Clean your eyelids using cotton wool or a cotton bud. It might help to use a small amount of baby shampoo in water. Gently wipe along the edge of your eyelids to remove any flakes or crusts.
A pharmacist can help with blepharitis
A pharmacist might be able to suggest things to help keep your eyelids clean, including:
eye pads and wipes
eyedrops
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
blepharitis symptoms do not improve after a few weeks of cleaning your eyelids
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for blepharitis from a GP
A GP might suggest using an antibiotic cream or ointment that you rub on your eyelid if your blepharitis does not clear up after cleaning your eyelids regularly.
If blepharitis has caused other problems, such as a lump of fluid under the skin (cyst), antibiotic eyedrops or tablets may be recommended.
If your blepharitis is severe, or if you also have other eye symptoms, the GP may refer you to an eye specialist (ophthalmologist).
Causes of blepharitis
Blepharitis can be caused by:
a type of bacteria that lives on the skin
a skin condition, such as seborrhoeic dermatitis
the glands inside the eyelids not producing enough oil
Blepharitis cannot be spread to other people.
Page last reviewed: 08 February 2022
Next review due: 08 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright