Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Testicle pain
There are lots of possible causes of pain in the testicles (balls). It can sometimes be serious, so get medical help straight away if the pain is sudden, severe or does not go away.
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E immediately or call 999 if you have:
sudden, severe pain in a testicle
testicle pain along with feeling sick, being sick or pain in your tummy
testicle pain that has lasted more than an hour or continues when you're resting
These can be signs of a serious problem that needs to be treated in hospital as soon as possible.
Find your nearest A&E
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
aching or discomfort in your testicles that you're worried about
a lump in your testicles
swollen testicles
a change in the shape of your testicles
a change in the way your testicles feel
a testicle that has become bigger than the other
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Help from NHS 111
If you're not sure what to do, call 111 or get medical help from 111 online.
NHS 111 can tell you the right place to get help.
Causes of testicle pain
Sudden, severe testicle pain can be caused by twisting of the testicle (testicular torsion).
This is a serious problem that can lead to the loss of the testicle if it's not treated quickly.
Less serious causes of testicle pain include:
an infection (epididymitis)
an injury
an inguinal hernia
a build-up of fluid (cyst)
swollen veins in the testicles (varicocele)
Pain by itself is not usually a sign of testicular cancer. Cancer usually causes other symptoms like a lump or swelling in your testicle.
Do not try to self-diagnose the cause of your pain. Get medical help if you're worried.
Page last reviewed: 15 December 2021
Next review due: 15 December 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright