Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Unintentional weight loss
Unintentional weight loss is when you lose weight without changing your diet or exercise routine. It can be a sign of stress or a serious illness. See a GP just in case.
Causes of unintentional weight loss
Unintentional weight loss has many different causes.
It might be caused by a stressful event like a divorce, losing a job, or the death of a loved one. It can also be caused by malnutrition, a health condition or a combination of things.
Some causes of unintentional weight loss include:
mental health conditions, such as depression, anxiety, eating disorders and obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
problems with digestion, such as coeliac disease or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
other health conditions, such as an overactive thyroid, type 2 diabetes or heart failure
Sometimes weight loss can be caused by cancer. It's important to get it checked if you're losing weight without trying.
Non-urgent advice:
See if a GP:
you keep losing weight without changing your diet or exercise routine
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for unintentional weight loss
Treatment for unintentional weight loss depends on what's causing it.
A GP will ask about your health and may arrange some tests or scans.
Depending on the possible cause, they may:
advise you about things you can do to help, such as ways to reduce stress
recommend treatment for any condition that's causing you to lose weight
refer you to a specialist
Page last reviewed: 16 February 2022
Next review due: 16 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright