Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Dyspraxia (developmental co-ordination disorder) in adults
Dyspraxia, also known as developmental co-ordination disorder (DCD), is a common disorder that affects movement and co-ordination.
Dyspraxia does not affect your intelligence. It can affect your co-ordination skills – such as tasks requiring balance, playing sports or learning to drive a car. Dyspraxia can also affect your fine motor skills, such as writing or using small objects.
This page focuses on dyspraxia in adults. You can also read about childhood dyspraxia.
Symptoms of dyspraxia
Symptoms of dyspraxia can vary between individuals and may change over time. You may find routine tasks difficult.
If you have dyspraxia it may affect:
your co-ordination, balance and movement
how you learn new skills, think, and remember information at work and home
your daily living skills, such as dressing or preparing meals
your ability to write, type, draw and grasp small objects
how you function in social situations
how you deal with your emotions
time management, planning and personal organisation skills
Dyspraxia should not be confused with other disorders affecting movement, such as cerebral palsy and stroke. It can affect people of all intellectual abilities.
When to see a GP
See a GP if you think you may have undiagnosed dyspraxia or problems with your co-ordination. It's a good idea to keep a diary of your symptoms. 
The GP may refer you to a physiotherapist or an occupational therapist for tests. They'll assess your movements and how your symptoms are affecting you before making a diagnosis. 
If you have dyspraxia, you may also have other conditions, such as:
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
dyslexia
autism spectrum disorder
difficulty learning or understanding maths (dyscalculia)
depression or anxiety
Causes of dyspraxia
It's not known what causes dyspraxia. You may be at a higher risk of developing it if you were born prematurely.
Dyspraxia is more common in men and often runs in families.
Treatment for dyspraxia
There is no cure for dyspraxia but there are therapies that can help with daily living, such as:
occupational therapy – to help you find practical ways to remain independent and manage everyday tasks such as writing or preparing food
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) – a talking therapy that can help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and behave
It may also help if you:
keep fit – you may find regular exercise helps with co-ordination, reduces feelings of fatigue and prevents you gaining weight
learn how to use a computer or laptop if writing by hand is difficult
use a calendar, diary or app to improve your organisation
learn how to talk positively about your challenges and how you've overcome them
get support from programmes such as Access to Work from Jobcentre Plus
Support for people living with dyspraxia
Dyspraxia can have a big effect on your life, but support is available to help you manage your condition.
It might help to talk to others with dyspraxia or to connect with a charity.
You may find these charity and forum links useful:
Dyspraxia Foundation – it has a list of local support groups you can join to share your experiences with others
Dyspraxic Adults – a forum for adults with dyspraxia
Movement Matters UK – see its page of useful links
Page last reviewed: 01 October 2020
Next review due: 01 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright