Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Postmenopausal bleeding
Menopause is usually diagnosed in women over 45 who have not had a period for more than a year. Any bleeding from the vagina after this time needs to be checked by a GP.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have postmenopausal bleeding, even if:
it's only happened once
there's only a small amount of blood, spotting, or pink or brown discharge
you do not have any other symptoms
you're not sure if it's blood
Postmenopausal bleeding is not usually serious, but can be a sign of cancer. Cancer is easier to treat if it's found early.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
The GP should refer you to hospital or a special postmenopausal bleeding clinic. You should not have to wait more than 2 weeks to see a specialist.
What happens at your hospital or clinic appointment
A specialist, who may be a nurse, will offer you tests to help find out what's causing the bleeding and plan any necessary treatment.
The tests may include:
a small device being placed in your vagina to scan for any problems (vaginal ultrasound scan)
an examination of your pelvis and vagina – a speculum (plastic device) may be inserted into your vagina to hold it open, so the inside of the vagina and the cervix can be seen
a thin, telescope-like camera being passed up your vagina, through the cervix and into your womb to look for any problems (a hysteroscopy) and to take a tissue sample (biopsy) for testing – under local or general anaesthetic
the specialist may press on your tummy and inside your vagina to check for lumps, tenderness or other abnormalities
Causes of postmenopausal bleeding
There can be several causes of postmenopausal bleeding.
The most common causes are:
inflammation and thinning of the vaginal lining (atrophic vaginitis) or womb lining (endometrial atrophy) – caused by lower oestrogen levels
cervical or womb polyps – growths that are usually non-cancerous
a thickened womb lining (endometrial hyperplasia) – this can be caused by hormone replacement therapy (HRT), high levels of oestrogen or being overweight, and can lead to womb cancer
Less commonly, postmenopausal bleeding is caused by cancer, such as ovarian and womb cancer.
Treatment for postmenopausal bleeding
Treatment depends on what's causing your bleeding.
Treatment for postmenopausal bleeding
Cause Treatment
Cervical polyps the polyps may need to be removed by a specialist
Endometrial atrophy you may not need treatment, but may be offered oestrogen cream or pessaries
Endometrial hyperplasia depending on the type of hyperplasia, you may be offered no treatment, hormone medicine (tablets or an intrauterine system, IUS) or a total hysterectomy (surgery to remove your uterus, cervix and ovaries)
Side effect of HRT changing or stopping HRT treatment
Womb cancer total hysterectomy will often be recommended
Ovarian cancer surgery to remove your ovaries and your womb (total hysterectomy)
Page last reviewed: 14 July 2020
Next review due: 14 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright