Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Cartilage damage
Contents
Overview
Treatment
Cartilage damage is a relatively common type of injury. It often involves the knees, although joints such as the hips, ankles and elbows can also be affected.
Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue found throughout the body. It covers the surface of joints, acting as a shock absorber and allowing bones to slide over one another.
It can become damaged as a result of a sudden injury, such as a sports injury, or gradual wear and tear (osteoarthritis).
Minor cartilage injuries may get better on their own within a few weeks, but more severe cartilage damage may eventually require surgery.
Symptoms of cartilage damage
Symptoms of cartilage damage in a joint include:
joint pain – this may continue even when resting and worsen when you put weight on the joint
swelling – this may not develop for a few hours or days
stiffness
a clicking or grinding sensation
the joint locking, catching, or giving way
It can sometimes be difficult to tell a cartilage injury apart from other common joint injuries, such as sprains, as the symptoms are similar.
When to get medical advice
If you've injured your joint, it's a good idea to try self care measures first. Sprains and minor cartilage damage may get better on their own within a few days or weeks.
More severe cartilage damage probably will not improve on its own. If left untreated, it can eventually wear down the joint.
Visit your GP or a minor injuries unit (MIU) if:
you cannot move the joint properly
you cannot control the pain with ordinary painkillers
you cannot put any weight on the injured limb or it gives way when you try to use it
the injured area looks crooked or has unusual lumps or bumps (other than swelling)
you have numbness, discolouration, or coldness in any part of the injured area
your symptoms have not started to improve within a few days of self-treatment
Your GP may need to refer you for tests such as an X-ray, MRI scan, or arthroscopy to find out if your cartilage is damaged.
Treatments for cartilage damage
Self care measures are usually recommended as the first treatment for minor joint injuries.
For the first few days:
protect the affected area from further injury by using a support, such as a knee brace
rest the affected joint
elevate the affected limb and apply an ice pack to the joint regularly
take ordinary painkillers, such as paracetamol or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen
Get medical advice if your symptoms are severe or do not improve after a few days. You may need professional treatment, such as physiotherapy, or possibly surgery.
A number of surgical techniques can be used, including:
encouraging the growth of new cartilage by drilling small holes in the nearby bone
replacing the damaged cartilage with healthy cartilage taken from another part of the joint
replacing the entire joint with an artificial one, such as a knee replacement or hip replacement – this is usually only necessary in the most severe cases
Read more about how cartilage damage is treated.
Page last reviewed: 25 May 2019
Next review due: 25 May 2022
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright