Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Teeth grinding (bruxism)
Contents
Overview
Treatment
Teeth grinding (also called bruxism) is often related to stress or anxiety. There are things you can do to help and treatments available from a dentist or GP.
Causes of teeth grinding
It’s not always clear what causes teeth grinding.
It’s often linked to:
stress and anxiety – this is the most common cause of teeth grinding
sleep problems like snoring, obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) and sleep paralysis
taking certain medicines, including a type of antidepressant known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
smoking, drinking lots of alcohol and caffeine, and taking drugs like ecstasy and cocaine
Teeth grinding is common in children and teenagers, particularly during sleep. It often stops when they reach adulthood and their adult teeth have come through.
How to reduce teeth grinding
There are a number of things you can try that may help if you grind your teeth.
Do
find ways to relax – for example, by doing breathing exercises, listening to music and taking regular exercise
try to improve your sleep by going to bed at the same time every night, relaxing before bedtime and making sure your bedroom is dark and quiet
try jaw exercises, such as stretching the jaw muscles by opening your mouth as wide as you can and repeating it 10 times, once or twice a day
take painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen if you have jaw pain or swelling
use an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel for 20 to 30 minutes to help reduce jaw pain or swelling
have regular dental check-ups
Don’t
do not smoke
do not drink too much alcohol
do not take drugs like ecstasy or cocaine
do not chew gum or eat hard foods if you have tooth or jaw pain
Symptoms of teeth grinding
Teeth grinding can happen while you’re awake or asleep.
As well as grinding your teeth and clenching your jaw, other symptoms can include:
face, neck and shoulder pain
a painful jaw, which can lead to a condition called temporomandibular disorder (TMD)
worn-down or broken teeth, which can cause increased sensitivity and loss of teeth and fillings
headaches
earache
disturbed sleep
Non-urgent advice:
See a dentist if:
you grind your teeth and have tooth damage or sensitivity
you grind your teeth and have pain in your jaw, face or ear
your partner says you're grinding your teeth in your sleep
you're worried about your child grinding their teeth
Find a dentist
See a GP if you need help with some of the causes of teeth grinding, such as stress, anxiety, smoking, drinking too much or taking drugs.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments for teeth grinding
Treatment for teeth grinding is not always needed.
Treatments from a dentist
A dentist may recommend a mouth guard or mouth splint. These are worn at night and protect your teeth from damage. They can be made by a dentist to fit precisely over your upper or lower teeth
Mouth splints are more expensive than mouth guards but last longer.
Treatments from a GP
A GP can give you advice and recommend treatments for reducing stress.
They will also be able to help if you want to give up smoking, or if you need advice about drug addiction or cutting down on alcohol.
Page last reviewed: 04 May 2020
Next review due: 04 May 2023
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright