Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Syphilis
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Testing
Treatment
Syphilis is a bacterial infection that's usually caught by having sex with someone who's infected.
It's important to get tested and treated as soon as possible if you think you might have syphilis, as it can cause serious problems if it's left untreated.
It can usually be cured with a short course of antibiotics.
You can catch syphilis more than once, even if you have been treated for it before.
Symptoms of syphilis
The symptoms of syphilis are not always obvious and may eventually disappear, but you'll usually remain infected unless you get treated.
Some people with syphilis have no symptoms.
Symptoms can include:
small, painless sores or ulcers that typically appear on the penis, vagina, or around the anus, but can occur in other places such as the mouth
a blotchy red rash that often affects the palms of the hands or soles of the feet
small skin growths (similar to genital warts) that may develop on the vulva in women or around the bottom (anus) in both men and women
white patches in the mouth
tiredness, headaches, joint pains, a high temperature (fever) and swollen glands in your neck, groin or armpits
If it's left untreated for years, syphilis can spread to the brain or other parts of the body and cause serious long-term problems.
What to do if you think you have syphilis
You should get tested as soon as possible if you're worried you could have syphilis.
This is because:
syphilis will not normally go away on its own
getting tested is the only way to find out if you have it
the medicines used to treat syphilis are only available on prescription – you cannot buy them yourself
treatment can help reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others and serious problems developing later on
The best place to get tested is a sexual health clinic.
The test for syphilis usually involves a blood test and removing a sample of fluid from any sores using a swab (similar to a cotton bud).
Important:
Using sexual health clinics during coronavirus (COVID-19)
Call a sexual health clinic if you need help or advice. Only go to a clinic if you've been told to.
Find sexual health clinic contact details
Treatments for syphilis
Syphilis is usually treated with either:
an injection of antibiotics into your buttocks – most people will only need 1 dose, although 3 injections given at weekly intervals may be recommended if you have had syphilis for a long time
a course of antibiotics tablets if you cannot have the injection – this will usually last 2 or 4 weeks, depending on how long you have had syphilis
You should avoid any kind of sexual activity or close sexual contact with another person until at least 2 weeks after your treatment finishes.
How syphilis is spread
Syphilis is mainly spread through close contact with an infected sore.
This usually happens during vaginal, anal or oral sex, or by sharing sex toys with someone who's infected. Anyone who's sexually active is potentially at risk.
It may be possible to catch syphilis if you inject yourself with drugs and you share needles with somebody who's infected, or through blood transfusions, but this is very rare in the UK as all blood donations are tested for syphilis.
Syphilis cannot be spread by using the same toilet, clothing, cutlery or bathroom as an infected person.
Pregnant women with syphilis can pass the infection to their unborn baby.
Find out more about syphilis in pregnancy
Preventing syphilis
Syphilis cannot always be prevented, but if you're sexually active you can reduce your risk by practising safer sex:
use a male condom or female condom during vaginal, oral and anal sex
use a dental dam (a square of plastic) during oral sex
avoid sharing sex toys – if you do share them, wash them and cover them with a condom before each use
These measures can also reduce your risk of catching other sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
If you inject yourself with drugs, do not use other people's needles or share your needles with others.
Syphilis in pregnancy
If a woman becomes infected while she's pregnant, or becomes pregnant when she already has syphilis, it can be very dangerous for her baby if not treated.
Infection in pregnancy can cause miscarriage, stillbirth or a serious infection in the baby (congenital syphilis).
Screening for syphilis during pregnancy is offered to all pregnant women so the infection can be detected and treated before it causes any serious problems.
Page last reviewed: 07 February 2019
Next review due: 07 February 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright