Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Red eye
A red eye is usually nothing to worry about and often gets better on its own. But sometimes it can be serious and you'll need to get medical help.
Common causes of a red eye
Lots of different things can cause a red eye.
Your symptoms might give you an idea of what's causing it.
Common causes of red eyes and related symptoms.
Symptoms Possible cause
Bright red area in the white of your eye Burst blood vessel
Gritty or burning feeling, sticky eyes Conjunctivitis
Sore, blurry or watery eyes Dry eyes
Itchy, sore or red eyelids Blepharitis
Feels like there's something in your eye Ingrowing eyelash
Swollen, drooping or twitching eyelid, or a lump on your eyelid Eyelid problems
What to do if you have a red eye
If your eye does not hurt and your sight is not affected, it's probably nothing serious. It may get better on its own in a few days.
Until it has got better:
try not to touch or rub your eye
do not wear contact lenses
A pharmacist can help if you have a red eye
You can ask a pharmacist if:
there's anything you can do to treat your eye yourself
you can buy anything to help, such as cleaning solutions, eyedrops or medicines
you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have a red eye for more than a few days
your child is under 2 years old and has a red eye
If your GP cannot find what's causing your red eye, they may refer you to an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) for tests.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
your baby has red eyes and they're less than 28 days old
your eye is painful and red
you have a red eye and wear contact lenses – you could have an eye infection
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
You have a red eye and:
you have any changes to your sight, like wavy lines, flashing or loss of vision
it hurts to look at light
you have a severe headache and feel sick
your eye or eyes are very dark red
you have injured or pierced your eye
1 pupil is bigger than the other
something is stuck in your eye (like a piece of glass or grit)
Find your nearest A&E
Page last reviewed: 21 March 2022
Next review due: 21 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright