Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Early menopause
Early menopause happens when a woman's periods stop before the age of 45. It can happen naturally, or as a side effect of some treatments.
For most women, the menopause starts between the ages of 45 and 55.
If you're under 45 and have noticed your periods becoming infrequent or stopping altogether, you should speak to a GP.
Causes of early menopause
The ovaries stop working
Early menopause can happen naturally if a woman's ovaries stop making normal levels of certain hormones, particularly the hormone oestrogen.
This is sometimes called premature ovarian failure, or primary ovarian insufficiency.
The cause of premature ovarian failure is often unknown, but in some women it may be caused by:
chromosome abnormalities – such as in women with Turner syndrome
an autoimmune disease – where the immune system starts attacking body tissues
certain infections, such as tuberculosis, malaria and mumps – but this is very rare
Premature ovarian failure can sometimes run in families. This might be the case if any of your relatives went through the menopause at a very young age (20s or early 30s).
Cancer treatments
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy can cause premature ovarian failure. This may be permanent or temporary.
Your risk of having an early menopause will depend on:
your age – girls who have not yet reached puberty can tolerate stronger treatment than older women
the type of treatment you're given – different types of chemotherapy may affect the ovaries differently
where on your body any radiotherapy is focused – your risk of developing premature menopause is higher if you have radiotherapy treatment around your brain or pelvis
Surgery to remove the ovaries
Surgically removing both ovaries will also bring on premature or early menopause.
For example, the ovaries may need to be removed during a hysterectomy (an operation to remove the womb).
Symptoms of early menopause
The main symptom of early menopause is periods becoming infrequent or stopping altogether without any other reason (such as pregnancy).
Some women may also get other typical menopausal symptoms, including:
hot flushes
night sweats
vaginal dryness and discomfort during sex
difficulty sleeping
low mood or anxiety
reduced sex drive (libido)
problems with memory and concentration
Read more about the symptoms of the menopause.
Women who go through early menopause also have an increased risk of osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease because of their lowered oestrogen hormone levels.
Diagnosing early menopause
A GP should be able to make a diagnosis of early menopause based on your symptoms, your family history, and blood tests to check your hormone levels.
You may be referred to a specialist.
Treatments for early menopause
The main treatment for early menopause is either the combined contraceptive pill or HRT to make up for your missing hormones.
A GP will probably recommend you take this treatment until at least the age of natural menopause (around 51 on average), to give you some protection from osteoporosis and other conditions that can develop after the menopause.
If you have had certain types of cancer, such as certain types of breast cancer, you may not be able to have hormonal treatment.
The GP will talk to you about other treatment options and lifestyle changes you can make to help protect your health.
If you're still getting symptoms, the GP can refer you to a specialist menopause centre.
Read more about treating the symptoms of the menopause.
Getting support
Going through the menopause early can be difficult and upsetting.
Permanent early menopause will affect your ability to have children naturally.
You may still be able to have children by using IVF and donated eggs from another woman, or using your own eggs if you had some stored. Surrogacy and adoption may also be options for you.
Counselling and support groups may be helpful.
Here are some you may want to try:
The Daisy Network – a support group for women with premature ovarian failure
healthtalk.org – provides information about early menopause, including women talking about their own experiences
Fertility friends – a support network for people with fertility problems
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) – provides information on all types of fertility treatment
Adoption UK – a charity for people who are adopting children
Surrogacy UK – a charity that supports both surrogates and parents through the process
Page last reviewed: 02 February 2021
Next review due: 02 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright