Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Epilepsy
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Living with
Epilepsy is a common condition that affects the brain and causes frequent seizures.
Seizures are bursts of electrical activity in the brain that temporarily affect how it works. They can cause a wide range of symptoms.
Epilepsy can start at any age, but usually starts either in childhood or in people over 60.
It's often lifelong, but can sometimes get slowly better over time.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Epilepsy Action: coronavirus and epilepsy
Epilepsy Society: epilepsy and coronavirus FAQs
Symptoms of epilepsy
Seizures can affect people in different ways, depending on which part of the brain is involved.
Possible symptoms include:
uncontrollable jerking and shaking, called a "fit"
losing awareness and staring blankly into space
becoming stiff
strange sensations, such as a "rising" feeling in the tummy, unusual smells or tastes, and a tingling feeling in your arms or legs
collapsing
Sometimes you might pass out and not remember what happened.
When to get medical help
See a GP if you think you might have had a seizure for the first time.
This does not mean you have epilepsy, as a seizure can have several causes and sometimes they're just a one-off, but you should see a doctor to find out why it happened.
Find out more about the tests for epilepsy you might have 
Call 999 for an ambulance if someone:
is having a seizure for the first time
has a seizure that lasts more than 5 minutes
has lots of seizures in a row
has breathing problems or has seriously injured themselves
Find out what to do if someone has a seizure
Treatments for epilepsy
Treatment can help most people with epilepsy have fewer seizures or stop having seizures completely.
Treatments include:
medicines called anti-epileptic drugs – these are the main treatment
surgery to remove a small part of the brain that's causing the seizures
a procedure to put a small electrical device inside the body that can help control seizures
a special diet (ketogenic diet) that can help control seizures
Some people need treatment for life. But you might be able to stop treatment if your seizures disappear over time.
Living with epilepsy
Epilepsy is usually a lifelong condition, but most people with it are able to have normal lives if their seizures are well controlled.
Most children with epilepsy are able to go to a mainstream school, take part in most activities and sports, and get a job when they're older.
But you may have to think about your epilepsy before you do things such as driving, certain jobs, swimming, using contraception and planning a pregnancy.
Advice is available from a GP or support groups to help you adjust to life with epilepsy.
Find out more about living with epilepsy
Causes of epilepsy
In epilepsy, the electrical signals in the brain become scrambled and there are sometimes sudden bursts of electrical activity. This is what causes seizures.
In most cases, it's not clear why this happens. It's possible it could be partly caused by your genes affecting how your brain works, as around 1 in 3 people with epilepsy have a family member with it.
Occasionally, epilepsy can be caused by damage to the brain, such as damage from:
a stroke
a brain tumour
a severe head injury
drug abuse or alcohol misuse
a brain infection
a lack of oxygen during birth
Page last reviewed: 18 September 2020
Next review due: 18 September 2023
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright