Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Social care and support guide
If you or someone you know needs help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability, this website explains your options and where you can get support.
Introduction to care and support
A quick guide for people who have care and support needs and their carers.
Help from social services and charities
Includes helplines, needs assessments, advocacy and reporting abuse.
Care services, equipment and care homes
Includes home adaptations, help at home from a paid carer, staying safe and housing.
Money, work and benefits
How to pay for care and support, and where you can get help with costs.
Care after a hospital stay
Includes hospital discharge and care and support afterwards.
Support and benefits for carers
Includes carer's assessments, support from local councils, respite care and help for young carers.
Practical tips if you care for someone
Includes advice on challenging behaviour, moving and lifting people and medicines.
Caring for children and young people
Services, support and tips if you care for someone under 21, and moving to adult social services.
Making decisions for someone else
Includes powers of attorney and mental capacity.
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright