Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Twitching eyes and muscles
Twitches are common and very rarely a sign of anything serious. They often go away on their own, but see a GP if a twitch lasts more than 2 weeks.
Twitches are usually nothing to worry about
Most people get twitches from time to time.
They're often linked to:
stress and anxiety
tiredness and exhaustion
drinking caffeine or alcohol
some medicines – check the side effects on the packet or leaflet
Twitches can affect any part of the body. Twitches in the eyes or legs are particularly common.
You may also have tingling or cramps (spasms) in the same area.
How you can help stop a twitch
A twitch may come and go, but will normally stop in a few days or weeks.
There’s not usually any treatment for it.
But there are some things you can do to help.
Do
get plenty of rest
try to find ways to relax
stretch and massage any muscles affected by cramps
try not to worry about it – a twitch is usually harmless and worrying can make it worse
Don’t
do not drink lots of caffeine, such as tea and coffee
do not drink lots of alcohol
do not stop taking a prescribed medicine without getting medical advice, even if you think it could be causing your twitch
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have a twitch for more than 2 weeks
you have a twitch in more than 1 place
the affected area feels weak or stiff
you think a prescribed medicine might be causing your twitch
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
If your twitch does not go away, your GP may:
check for causes like stress or a medicine you're taking
ask you to come back if the twitch has not stopped in a few weeks
refer you to a specialist called a neurologist for tests to look for conditions that can cause a twitch
Conditions that can cause a twitch
Page last reviewed: 05 February 2021
Next review due: 05 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright