Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Balanitis
Balanitis is when the head of the penis is swollen and sore.
Balanitis is not usually serious but it's important to see a GP to find out what's causing it.
Check if you have balanitis
With balanitis, the head of your penis is usually:
red, swollen, itchy and sore
Other symptoms can include:
pain when peeing
a thick discharge that comes from under your foreskin
bleeding around your foreskin
an unpleasant smell
difficulty pulling back your foreskin – though in young children it's normal to have a tight foreskin
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you or your child have symptoms of balanitis
treatment has not worked
Adults can also go to a sexual health clinic for assessment.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Sexual health clinics can help with balanitis
Sexual health clinics treat problems with the genitals.
Many sexual health clinics offer a walk-in service, where you do not need an appointment.
They'll often get test results quicker than GP practices.
During coronavirus, call a sexual health clinic if you need help or advice. Only go to a clinic if you've been told to.
Find a sexual health clinic
What happens at your appointment
A doctor or nurse will look at your penis and ask you a few questions. They may also wipe a cotton bud over the head of your penis to test for infections.
If any treatment they prescribe does not work, the cause is unknown, or the infection is severe and thrush is present, a blood test may be suggested to check if you have diabetes.
Treatment for balanitis
Treatment for balanitis depends on what's causing it.
A GP may prescribe:
a mild steroid cream or ointment
an antifungal cream or ointment
antibiotics
If you or your child keeps getting balanitis and medicine has not helped, circumcision (surgery to remove the foreskin) may be considered.
Things you can do if you have balanitis
Do
wash your penis every day
gently pull back your foreskin and wash the area with warm water
dry gently after washing
if you use condoms, choose condoms for sensitive skin
wash your hands before peeing or touching your penis
Don’t
do not use soap or shower gel but you could use an emollient (moisturising treatment)
Things you can do if your child has balanitis
Do
gently wash your child's penis every day
use warm water and then dry it gently
if they wear nappies, change your child's nappies often
Don’t
do not use soap, bubble bath or baby wipes
do not pull your child's foreskin back if it is fixed in place
Causes of balanitis
Causes of balanitis include:
not washing your penis properly
some young boys have a very tight foreskin (phimosis), which means they cannot pull it back to clean under it
thrush
a sexually transmitted infection (STI) such as gonorrhoea or chlamydia – if a STI is suspected you may be referred to a sexual health clinic
substances such as soap, shower gels or condoms may irritate the skin
diabetes – high levels of sugar in your pee can cause thrush
Page last reviewed: 08 July 2020
Next review due: 08 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright