Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z Foot pain
Toe pain
There are lots of causes of toe pain. You can usually ease the pain yourself. But see a GP if the pain does not improve.
How to ease toe pain yourself
If you see a GP about toe pain, they'll usually suggest trying these things:
Do
rest and raise your foot when you can
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel on your toe for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
wear wide comfortable shoes with a low heel and soft sole
take paracetamol
buddy strap a broken toe – put a small piece of cotton wool or gauze between your sore toe and the next toe, and use tape to loosely strap it up (do not do this for a big toe or a badly broken toe)
try regular gentle stretching exercises
Don’t
do not take ibuprofen for the first 48 hours after an injury
do not walk or stand for long periods
do not wear high heels or tight pointy shoes
A pharmacist can help with toe pain
If you have toe pain, a pharmacist can advise you about:
the best painkiller to take
insoles and pads for your shoes
treatments for common skin and nail problems
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Video: exercises to reduce toe pain
This video demonstrates exercises that can help reduce toe pain.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 17 April 2019
Media review due: 17 April 2022
See exercise video safety information
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
pain in your toe is stopping you doing normal activities
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it at home for 2 weeks
you have diabetes and foot pain – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
What we mean by severe pain
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Go to an urgent treatment centre or A&E if:
you have badly hurt your big toe
you're in severe pain
you feel faint, dizzy or sick from the pain
you have any tingling or loss of sensation in your foot
your toe is pointing at an odd angle
you heard a snap, grinding or popping noise at the time of injury
you have difficulty moving your toes or you cannot walk
These might be signs of a badly broken toe after an injury.
Find an urgent treatment centre
What we mean by severe pain
Causes of toe pain
A sore toe is often caused by exercising too much or wearing shoes that are too tight.
Your symptoms might also give you an idea of what's causing your toe pain.
Some of the possible causes of toe pain.
Symptoms Possible cause
Pain or swelling around the nail, nail curls into the toe Ingrown toe nail
Hard bony lump near the big toe Bunion
Pain, tingling and numbness when you're cold or stressed, toes can change colour Raynaud's or chilblains
Pain, swelling, red or bruised toe, hurts to walk Broken toe
Sudden pain, stiffness, red or hot swollen skin around the toe joint Gout
Information:
Do not worry if you're not sure what the problem is.
Follow the advice on this page and see a GP if the pain does not get better in 2 weeks.
More in Foot pain
Ankle pain
Heel pain
Toe pain
Pain in the top of the foot
Pain in the bottom of the foot
Pain in the ball of the foot
Page last reviewed: 4 March 2022
Next review due: 4 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright