Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Cervical spondylosis
Cervical spondylosis causes neck pain – often in the over 50s. A GP should check more serious cases affecting the spine.
Check if it's cervical spondylosis
Ageing causes wear and tear to muscles and bones. This is called cervical spondylosis.
Symptoms include:
neck and shoulder pain or stiffness – that comes and goes
headaches that often start at the back of the neck
Exercise can ease cervical spondylosis symptoms
Neck pain can be helped with exercise and by improving your posture
A pharmacist can help with cervical spondylosis
Painkillers like paracetamol and ibuprofen can help ease neck pain and stiffness.
Ask a pharmacist if they can recommend stronger painkillers if you need them.
Find a pharmacist in your area
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
pain that's getting much worse
lack of co-ordination – for example trouble with tasks like buttoning a shirt
heaviness or weakness in your arms or legs
pins and needles in an arm as well as pain
problems walking
loss of bladder or bowel control
These can be signs of a more severe condition (cervical myelopathy), which can cause permanent damage to the spine if left untreated.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will examine your neck and shoulder. They may also test your reflexes and watch you walk.
Depending on your symptoms you may be sent for other tests such as X-rays or scans.
Treatment from a GP
Treatment depends on how bad your symptoms are.
The GP may give you more exercises to do and recommend you carry out your usual activities as much as possible.
The GP may also prescribe a muscle relaxant or other medicine if the pain has been coming and going for a long time (chronic pain).
It usually takes a few weeks for treatment to work, although the pain and stiffness can come back.
Surgery is only considered if:
a nerve is being pinched by a slipped disc or bone (cervical radiculopathy)
there's a problem with your spinal cord (cervical myelopathy)
Surgery is not always a cure but it may stop your symptoms getting worse.
Information:
Physiotherapy for cervical spondylosis
If your symptoms do not improve in a few weeks the GP may recommend physiotherapy.
Waiting times for physiotherapy on the NHS can be long.
You can also get physiotherapy privately.
Find a registered physiotherapist
Causes of cervical spondylosis
Many people aged over 50 have cervical spondylosis as part of getting older.
You can get cervical spondylosis at any age if:
your job involves repetitive neck movements or a lot of overhead work – like painting and decorating
you have previously had a neck injury
you have a family history of the condition
Page last reviewed: 16 September 2020
Next review due: 16 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright