Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hip pain in adults
Hip pain is common, especially as you get older. There are things you can do to ease the pain, but get medical help if your hip is very painful or the pain does not get better.
There is separate information about hip pain in children.
Causes of hip pain
There are lots of possible causes of hip pain. It might be caused by a sudden injury or a longer-lasting problem such as arthritis.
Your symptoms might give you an idea what could be causing the pain. But do not self-diagnose, see a GP if you're worried.
Common causes of hip pain and related symptoms.
Symptoms Possible cause
Pain, swelling or bruising after intense or repetitive exercise Sprain or strain
Over 45 years of age, pain worse when walking and stiffness after moving Osteoarthritis
Pain and stiffness worse after not moving (for example, when you wake up) Rheumatoid arthritis
Hot, swollen hip and a high temperature or feeling hot and shivery Joint infection (septic arthritis)
Severe pain and unable to walk after a fall or injury Hip fracture
How you can ease hip pain
There are things you can do to help ease hip pain.
Do
try to avoid putting too much strain on your hip – it's best to keep moving if you can, but try not to overdo things
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) in a towel on the painful area for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
take paracetamol
wear comfortable, shock-absorbing shoes with a soft sole
try to lose weight if you're overweight
try gentle hip stretching exercises
Don’t
do not take ibuprofen for the first 48 hours after an injury
do not carry anything heavy
do not sit in low chairs – this can put extra pressure on your hips
Information:
Exercises for hip pain
Versus Arthritis: exercises for the hips
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
hip pain is stopping you doing normal activities or affecting your sleep
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it at home for 2 weeks
you have hip stiffness for more than 30 minutes after waking up
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have severe hip pain that started suddenly but you've not had a fall or injured your hip
your hip is swollen and feels hot
the skin around your hip has changed colour
you have hip pain and feel generally unwell and have a high temperature or feel hot and shivery
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
What we mean by severe pain
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe hip pain after a fall or injury
you're unable to walk or put weight on your leg
you have any tingling or loss of feeling in your hip or leg after an injury
Find your nearest A&E
Treatments for hip pain
Treatment for hip pain depends on what's causing it.
A GP might:
prescribe stronger painkillers
give you some simple exercises to try
refer you for physiotherapy for more help with exercises and stretches to ease the pain
refer you for occupational therapy – an occupational therapist can help with things to make your life easier, such as walking sticks or walking aids
refer you to a specialist – the specialist may do a scan and discuss treatments such as steroid injections or surgery
Some people with pain caused by a damaged hip joint may eventually need a hip replacement if other treatments do not help.
Page last reviewed: 11 March 2022
Next review due: 11 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright