Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Human papillomavirus (HPV)
HPV is the name of a very common group of viruses. They do not cause any problems in most people, but some types can cause genital warts or cancer.
HPV affects the skin. There are more than 100 different types.
How human papillomavirus (HPV) is spread
Many types of HPV affect the mouth, throat or genital area. They're easy to catch.
You do not need to have penetrative sex.
You can get HPV from:
any skin-to-skin contact of the genital area
vaginal, anal or oral sex
sharing sex toys
HPV has no symptoms, so you may not know if you have it.
It's very common. Most people will get some type of HPV in their life.
Important
You do not have to have sexual contact with a lot of people to get HPV. You can get HPV the first time you're sexually active.
Conditions linked to human papillomavirus (HPV)
Most of the time HPV does not cause any problems.
In some people, some types of HPV can cause:
genital warts
abnormal changes in the cells that can sometimes turn into cancer
HPV types linked to cancer are called high-risk types.
Cancers linked to high-risk HPV include:
cervical cancer
anal cancer
cancer of the penis
vulval cancer
vaginal cancer
some types of head and neck cancer
Information:
You can have HPV for many years without it causing problems.
You can have it even if you have not been sexually active or had a new partner for many years.
How to protect yourself against human papillomavirus (HPV)
You cannot fully protect yourself against HPV, but there are things that can help.
Condoms can help protect you against HPV, but they do not cover all the skin around your genitals, so you're not fully protected.
The HPV vaccine protects against the types of HPV that cause most cases of genital warts and cervical cancer, as well as some other cancers. It does not protect against all types of HPV.
Find out more about the HPV vaccine and who can have it
Testing for human papillomavirus (HPV)
HPV testing is part of cervical screening. There's no blood test for HPV.
During cervical screening, a small sample of cells is taken from the cervix and tested for HPV.
Screening is offered to all women and people with a cervix aged 25 to 64. It helps protect them against cervical cancer.
Some sexual health clinics may offer anal screening to men with a higher risk of developing anal cancer, such as men who have sex with men.
Find out more about cervical screening and how it helps protect against cervical cancer
Treating human papillomavirus (HPV) infections
There's no treatment for HPV. Most HPV infections do not cause any problems and are cleared by your body within 2 years.
Treatment is needed if HPV causes problems like genital warts or changes to cells in the cervix.
Read more about treating genital warts and treating abnormal cell changes in the cervix.
Page last reviewed: 19 March 2019
Next review due: 19 March 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright