Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Cancer
Contents
Overview
Signs and symptoms
Cancer is a condition where cells in a specific part of the body grow and reproduce uncontrollably. The cancerous cells can invade and destroy surrounding healthy tissue, including organs.
Cancer sometimes begins in one part of the body before spreading to other areas. This process is known as metastasis.
1 in 2 people will develop some form of cancer during their lifetime. In the UK, the 4 most common types of cancer are:
breast cancer
lung cancer
prostate cancer
bowel cancer
There are more than 200 different types of cancer, and each is diagnosed and treated in a particular way. You can find links on this page to information about other types of cancer.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Your care team will talk to you about the benefits and risks of starting or continuing cancer treatment at the moment.
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: Coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer
Spotting signs of cancer
Changes to your body's normal processes or unusual, unexplained symptoms can sometimes be an early sign of cancer.
Symptoms that need to be checked by a doctor include:
a lump that suddenly appears on your body
unexplained bleeding
changes to your bowel habits
But in many cases your symptoms will not be related to cancer and will be caused by other, non-cancerous health conditions.
Read more about the signs and symptoms of cancer.
Coronavirus update
It's important to get help from a GP if you have symptoms that you're worried about.
Find out about using the NHS during coronavirus
Reducing your risk of cancer
Making some simple changes to your lifestyle can significantly reduce your risk of developing cancer.
For example:
healthy eating
taking regular exercise
not smoking
The Macmillan Cancer Support website has more information about how a healthy lifestyle can help reduce your chances of developing cancer.
Cancer treatment
Surgery is the first treatment to try for most types of cancer, as solid tumours can usually be surgically removed.
2 other commonly used treatment methods are:
chemotherapy – powerful cancer-killing medicines
radiotherapy – the controlled use of high-energy X-rays
Waiting times
Accurately diagnosing cancer can take weeks or months. As cancer often develops slowly over several years, waiting for a few weeks will not usually impact on the effectiveness of treatment.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has produced referral guidelines for suspected cancer.
You should not have to wait more than 2 weeks to see a specialist if your GP suspects you have cancer and urgently refers you.
In cases where cancer has been confirmed, you should not have to wait more than 31 days from the decision to treat to the start of treatment.
NHS England has more detailed statistics on cancer waiting times.
Cancer services
Find local cancer support services
Find specialist cancer hospitals
Find cancer support services for women
Other cancer pages
The Health A-Z covers many different types of cancer:
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Anal cancer
Bile duct cancer
Bladder cancer
Bone cancer
Bowel cancer
Brain tumour (high-grade)
Brain tumour (low-grade/mixed)
Breast cancer (female)
Breast cancer (male)
Carcinoid tumours
Cervical cancer
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
Endometrial cancer
Ewing sarcoma
Eye cancer
Gallbladder cancer 
Hairy cell leukaemia
Head and neck cancer
Hodgkin lymphoma
Kaposi's sarcoma
Kidney cancer
Laryngeal cancer
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Mesothelioma
Mouth cancer
Multiple myeloma
Nasopharyngeal cancer
Neuroendocrine tumours
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Nose and sinus cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Penile cancer
Prostate cancer
Rectal cancer
Retinoblastoma
Skin cancer (malignant melanoma)
Skin cancer (non-melanoma)
Soft tissue sarcoma
Stomach cancer
Testicular cancer
Thyroid cancer
Uterine cancer
Vaginal cancer
Vulval cancer
Information:
Social care and support guide
If you:
need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability
care for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled – including family members
Our guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.
Page last reviewed: 17 September 2019
Next review due: 17 September 2022
Next
:
Signs and symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright