Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Blood in urine
Blood in urine (pee) is not usually caused by anything serious but you must get it checked out by a GP.
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if
you have blood in your urine and:
you do not have any other symptoms
it's the first time it's happened
there's only a small amount of blood
you're not sure it's blood
Blood in your pee may be bright pink, red or dark brown.
Cancer risk
Blood in pee must be checked out because it can be a sign of cancer. This is easier to treat if it's found early.
What happens at your appointment
The GP will ask about your symptoms and may need to examine your bottom (rectum), or vagina if you're a woman.
They might also:
ask for a pee sample or arrange a blood test
prescribe antibiotics if they think you have an infection
refer you to a specialist for tests
Causes of blood in urine
Blood in your pee could come from anywhere in the urinary tract – the bladder, kidneys or urethra (the tube that carries pee out of the body).
If you have other symptoms, this might give you an idea of the cause. Do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you think it's blood in your pee.
Possible causes of blood in urine
Other symptoms Possible cause
Burning pain when peeing, need to pee often, smelly or cloudy pee, high temperature, pain in sides or lower back urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Bad pain in sides, lower back or groin that comes and goes, unable to lie still, feeling sick kidney stones
Older men (common in over-50s) finding it difficult to pee, needing to pee suddenly and often, waking up to pee in middle of the night enlarged prostate
When it might be something else
It may not be blood in your pee if:
you've recently eaten beetroot – this can turn your pee pink
you're taking a new medicine – some medicines can turn pee red or brown
you're bleeding from your bottom instead
it's happening during your period
Information:
More information about blood in urine
The British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) has more information about blood in urine (haematuria).
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 24 June 2020
Next review due: 24 June 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright