Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Bell's palsy
Bell's palsy is temporary weakness or lack of movement affecting 1 side of the face. Most people get better within 9 months.
Unlike a stroke, the facial weakness develops gradually.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
somebody's face droops on 1 side (the mouth or eye may have drooped)
a person cannot lift up both arms and keep them there
a person has difficulty speaking (speech may be slurred or garbled)
These can be signs of a stroke, which is a medical emergency.
Unlike Bell's palsy, the symptoms of a stroke usually come on suddenly.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
weakness or total paralysis on 1 side of your face that develops quickly within 72 hours
a drooping eyelid or corner of the mouth
drooling
a dry mouth
a loss of taste
eye irritation, such as dryness or more tears
These are symptoms of Bell's palsy.
It's important to see a GP as soon as possible after developing these symptoms.

This is because treatment for Bell's palsy is more effective if started early (within 72 hours).

You may also have a problem closing one of your eyes. If this is the case you may need additional treatment to prevent damage to your vision.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
Treatments for Bell's palsy include:
a 10-day course of steroid medicine
eyedrops and eye ointment to stop the affected eye drying out
surgical tape to keep the eye closed at bedtime
The GP might prescribe a type of steroid called prednisolone. Treatment with prednisolone should begin within 3 days (72 hours) of the symptoms starting.
Bell's palsy is rare in children, and most children who are affected make a full recovery without treatment.
How long Bell's palsy lasts
Most people make a full recovery within 9 months, but it can take longer. In a small number of cases, the facial weakness can be permanent.
Go back to see a GP if there are no signs of improvement after 3 weeks. Some cases might need to be treated with surgery.
Living with Bell's palsy can make you feel depressed, stressed or anxious. Speak to a GP if it's affecting your mental health.
You cannot prevent Bell's palsy
Because it's probably caused by an infection, Bell's palsy cannot usually be prevented. It may be linked to the herpes virus.
You'll usually only get Bell's palsy once, but it can sometimes come back. This is more likely if you have a family history of the condition.
Page last reviewed: 11 September 2020
Next review due: 11 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright