Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Kidney cancer
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Kidney cancer, also called renal cancer, is one of the most common types of cancer in the UK.
It usually affects adults in their 60s or 70s. It is rare in people under 50.
It can often be cured if it's found early. But a cure will probably not be possible if it's diagnosed after it has spread beyond the kidney.
There are several types of kidney cancer. These pages focus on the most common type – renal cell carcinoma.
The Cancer Research UK website has information about other types of kidney cancer.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: Coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer
Symptoms of kidney cancer
In many cases, there are no obvious symptoms at first and kidney cancer may only be found during tests for another condition or reason.
If there are symptoms, they can include:
blood in your pee – you may notice your pee is darker than usual or reddish in colour
a persistent pain in your lower back or side, just below your ribs
a lump or swelling in your side (although kidney cancer is often too small to feel)
When to get medical advice
See a GP if you have symptoms of kidney cancer.
Although it's unlikely you have cancer, it's important to get your symptoms checked out.
The GP will ask about your symptoms and may test a sample of your urine to see if it contains blood or an infection.
If necessary, they may refer you to a hospital specialist for further tests to find out what the problem is.
Causes of kidney cancer
The exact cause of kidney cancer is unknown, but some things can increase your chances of getting it, including:
obesity – a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or more (use the healthy weight calculator to find your BMI)
smoking – the more you smoke, the greater the risk
high blood pressure (hypertension)
family history – you're more likely to get kidney cancer if you have a close relative with it
some inherited genetic conditions 
long-term dialysis – a treatment for chronic kidney disease where a machine does some of the jobs of the kidneys
Keeping to a healthy weight, a healthy blood pressure and not smoking is the best way to reduce your chances of getting kidney cancer.
Treatments for kidney cancer
The treatment for kidney cancer depends on the size of the cancer and whether it has spread to other parts of your body.
The main treatments are:
surgery to remove part or all of the affected kidney – this is the main treatment for most people
cryotherapy or radiofrequency ablation – where the cancerous cells are destroyed by freezing or heating
biological therapies – medicines that help stop the cancer growing or spreading
embolisation – a procedure to cut off the blood supply to the cancer
radiotherapy – using high-energy radiation to target cancer cells and relieve symptoms
Outlook for kidney cancer
The outlook for kidney cancer largely depends on how big the tumour is and how far it has spread by the time it's diagnosed.
If the cancer is still small and has not spread beyond the kidney, surgery can often cure it. Some small, slow growing cancers may not need treatment at first.
A cure is not usually possible if the cancer has spread, although treatment can sometimes help keep it under control. Some people become unwell quickly, but others may live for several years and feel well despite having kidney cancer.
Around 7 in 10 people live at least a year after diagnosis and around 5 in 10 live at least 10 years.
Cancer Research UK has more information about survival statistics for kidney cancer.
Support groups and charities
Further information, advice and support is available from:
Cancer Research UK: kidney cancer
Macmillan cancer support: kidney cancer
Kidney Cancer UK
Kidney Cancer Support Network
Page last reviewed: 03 December 2019
Next review due: 03 December 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright