Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Scurvy
Scurvy (severe vitamin C deficiency) is rare as most people get enough vitamin C in their diet. It's usually easy to treat.
Causes of scurvy
Scurvy is caused by not having enough vitamin C in your diet for at least 3 months. Vitamin C is mainly found in fruit and vegetables.
Even people who do not eat very healthily all the time are not usually considered at risk of scurvy.
Things that increase your risk of scurvy
Although scurvy is rare, you may be more at risk if you:
have no fresh fruits or vegetables in your diet for a while
eat very little food at all – possible reasons include treatments that make you feel very sick all the time (such as chemotherapy) or an eating disorder such as anorexia
smoke, as smoking reduces how much vitamin C your body gets from food
have a long-term dependency on drugs or alcohol that affects your diet
have a poor diet while pregnant or breastfeeding, because the body needs more vitamin C at these times
Babies, children and older people who find it hard to have a healthy diet may also be more at risk of scurvy.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you're at risk of scurvy and you:
feel very tired and weak all the time
feel irritable and sad all the time
have severe joint or leg pain
have swollen, bleeding gums (sometimes teeth can fall out)
develop red or blue spots on the skin, usually on your shins
have skin that bruises easily
These might be symptoms of scurvy.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treating scurvy
It's important that scurvy is treated. Scurvy is easily treated by adding some vitamin C to your diet such as fresh fruit and vegetables.
A GP may also recommend taking vitamin C supplements (also called ascorbic acid) until you feel better.
Most people treated for scurvy feel better within 48 hours and make a full recovery within 2 weeks.
The GP may refer you to a specialist for treatment, support or advice. This depends on what's causing your scurvy.
How to prevent a vitamin C deficiency
The best sources of vitamin C are fruit and vegetables.
The best way to get enough vitamins and minerals is to eat a healthy, balanced diet.
It's important to speak to a GP or midwife before taking any supplements or making changes to your diet during pregnancy
Page last reviewed: 23 November 2020
Next review due: 23 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright