Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Chipped, broken or cracked tooth
Chipping, breaking or cracking a tooth is usually not serious. A dentist should be able to treat it.
Non-urgent advice:
See a dentist if you or your child has:
chipped, cracked or broken a tooth
If a piece of tooth has broken off, put it in milk or saliva (by spitting into a container if it's your tooth, or having your child spit into a container if it's theirs) and take it to a dentist. The dentist may be able to glue the piece of tooth back on.
Do not go to a GP. They will not be able to give you dental treatment.
Information:
How to see a dentist in an emergency or out of hours:
call a dentist – if they're closed, their answerphone may say what to do
If you do not have a dentist or cannot get an emergency appointment:
call 111 – they can advise you what to do
find a dentist near you – ask for an emergency appointment
You may have to pay for your appointment.
Read more about NHS dental charges
What the dentist will do
Treatments for a chipped, broken or cracked tooth include:
gluing the fragment of tooth back on
a filling or a crown (a cap that completely covers the broken tooth)
root canal treatment for a badly broken tooth where the nerves are exposed
Read more about dental treatments
Page last reviewed: 13 August 2021
Next review due: 13 August 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright