Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Corns and calluses
Corns and calluses are hard or thick areas of skin that can be painful. They're not often serious. There are things you can try to ease them yourself.
Check if you have a corn or callus
You mostly get corns and calluses on your feet, toes and hands.
Corns are small lumps of hard skin.
Credit:
Calluses are larger patches of rough, thick skin.
Credit:
Corns and calluses can also be tender or painful.
What you can do about corns and calluses
Important
If you have diabetes, heart disease or problems with your circulation, do not try to treat corns and calluses yourself.
These conditions can make foot problems more serious. See a GP or foot specialist.
Corns and calluses are not often serious and there are things you can try to:
get rid of them yourself
stop them coming back
Do
wear thick, cushioned socks
wear wide, comfortable shoes with a low heel and soft sole that do not rub
use soft insoles or heel pads in your shoes
soak corns and calluses in warm water to soften them
regularly use a pumice stone or foot file to remove hard skin
moisturise to help keep skin soft
Don’t
do not try to cut off corns or calluses yourself
do not walk long distances or stand for long periods
do not wear high heels or tight pointy shoes
do not go barefoot
You can ask a pharmacist about:
heel pads and insoles
over-the-counter products to treat corns and calluses
different kinds of pain relief
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you think you have a corn or callus and:
you have diabetes
you have heart disease or problems with your circulation
it bleeds, or has any pus or discharge
it has not improved after treating it at home for 3 weeks
the pain is severe or stopping you doing your normal activities
What we mean by severe pain
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for corns and calluses
A GP can:
look at your foot to see if it's a corn or callus
give you antibiotics if a corn or callus is infected
refer you to a foot specialist if they think you need further treatment
Treatment from a foot specialist
A foot specialist, such as a podiatrist, may be able to offer treatments such as:
cutting away the corn or callus
patches to help soften the hard skin so it can be removed
specially made soft pads or insoles to take pressure off the painful area of your foot
Referral to a podiatrist on the NHS may not be available to everyone and waiting times can be long. You can pay to see a podiatrist privately.
Find a podiatrist
Common causes of corns or calluses
Corns and calluses are caused by pressure or rubbing of the skin on the hands or feet.
For example, from:
wearing high heels, uncomfortable shoes or shoes that are the wrong size
not wearing socks with shoes
lifting heavy weights
playing a musical instrument
Page last reviewed: 19 November 2018
Next review due: 19 November 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright