Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE)
Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is an infection spread by tick bites. Ticks that spread it are found in parts of Europe and Asia, and some parts of the UK.
Check if you could be at risk of TBE
The risk of getting TBE is very low.
Ticks that spread it can be found in:
most of Europe – including parts of England
Russia
parts of China and Japan
Ticks live in forests and grassy areas. You're more at risk of being bitten if you do activities such as hiking and camping.
Not all ticks spread TBE. Even if you're bitten, the risk of getting seriously ill is low.
Information:
You can check the risks of a country you're travelling to on the TravelHealthPro website
You can get vaccinated against TBE if you're at risk
Consider having the TBE vaccine if you're visiting a country where the infection is common and you're planning to do outdoor activities when you get there.
2 injections of the vaccine can protect you for about a year. A 3rd injection can protect you for about 3 years.
You need to have the first injection at least 1 month before travelling.
The TBE vaccine is not available on the NHS. Search online for a travel clinic that offers it. It costs about £65 per injection.
How to avoid tick bites
Always try to avoid being bitten in places where ticks are found.
To reduce the risk of being bitten:
cover your skin while walking outdoors and tuck your trousers into your socks
use insect repellent on your clothes and skin – products containing DEET are best
stick to paths whenever possible
wear light-coloured clothing so ticks are easier to spot and brush off
How to spot and remove ticks
Important
Tick bites are not always painful. You may not notice a tick unless you see it on your skin.
Always check your skin and hair after being outdoors.
Ticks can sometimes be very small and hard to spot.
Credit:
They get bigger if they bite you and feed on your blood.
Credit:
Remove them by grasping them close to the skin with fine-tipped tweezers or a tick removal tool.
Credit:
To remove a tick safely:
Use fine-tipped tweezers or a tick removal tool. You can buy these from some pharmacies, vets and pet shops.
Grasp the tick as close to your skin as possible.
Slowly pull upwards, taking care not to squeeze or crush the tick. Dispose of it when you have removed it.
Clean the bite with antiseptic or soap and water.
The risk of getting ill is low. You do not need to do anything else unless you become unwell.
Non-urgent advice:
See a doctor if:
You've been bitten by a tick or visited an area in the past month where ticks are found, and you get either:
flu-like symptoms – such as feeling hot and shivery, headaches, aching muscles or feeling sick
a circular red rash
Either of these could be an early sign of an infection.
Tell the doctor if you have been in forests or grassy areas.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E immediately if you or someone else:
gets a stiff neck and a severe headache
gets pain when looking at bright lights
has a fit (seizure)
has a change in behaviour – such as sudden confusion
develops weakness or loss of movement in part of the body
Page last reviewed: 23 April 2021
Next review due: 23 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright