Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
What is cervical screening?
-
Cervical screening
Contents
What is cervical screening?
Why it's important
When you'll be invited
How to book
What happens at your appointment
Your results
Further help and support
Cervical screening (a smear test) checks the health of your cervix. The cervix is the opening to your womb from your vagina.
It's not a test for cancer, it's a test to help prevent cancer.
All women and people with a cervix aged 25 to 64 should be invited by letter.
During the screening appointment, a small sample of cells will be taken from your cervix.
The sample is checked for certain types of human papillomavirus (HPV) that can cause changes to the cells of your cervix. These are called "high risk" types of HPV.
If these types of HPV are not found, you do not need any further tests.
If these types of HPV are found, the sample is then checked for any changes in the cells of your cervix. These can then be treated before they get a chance to turn into cervical cancer.
You'll get your results by letter, usually in about 2 weeks. It will explain what happens next.
Important:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update
Contact your GP surgery online or by phone if you think you are due to have cervical screening but have not been sent an invitation.
It's important to go to your appointment unless you have symptoms of COVID-19. All NHS services are making sure it's safe for you to attend.
Video: how cervical screening is done
This video shows someone having cervical screening. It shows an illustrated view of the inside of the body and explains what happens during the test.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 4 February 2022
Media review due: 4 February 2025
Important
Try not to put off cervical screening. It's one of the best ways to protect yourself from cervical cancer.
Help us improve our services
Can you answer some questions about your experiences with cervical screening to help us improve our services?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 31 March 2020
Next review due: 31 March 2023
Next
:
Why it's important
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright