Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Varicose veins
Contents
Overview
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Varicose veins are swollen and enlarged veins that usually occur on the legs and feet. They may be blue or dark purple, and are often lumpy, bulging or twisted in appearance.
Other symptoms include:
aching, heavy and uncomfortable legs
swollen feet and ankles
burning or throbbing in your legs
muscle cramp in your legs, particularly at night
dry, itchy and thin skin over the affected vein
The symptoms are usually worse during warm weather or if you've been standing up for long periods of time. They may improve when you walk around or if you rest and raise your legs.
When to see a GP
If you have varicose veins and they do not cause you any discomfort, you may not need to visit a GP.
Varicose veins are rarely a serious condition and do not usually require treatment.
But speak to a GP if:
your varicose veins are causing you pain or discomfort
the skin over your veins is sore and irritated
the aching in your legs is causing irritation at night and disturbing your sleep
The GP can diagnose varicose veins based on these symptoms, although further tests may be carried out.
Read about diagnosing varicose veins.
Causes of varicose veins
Varicose veins develop when the small valves inside the veins stop working properly.
In a healthy vein, blood flows smoothly to the heart. The blood is prevented from flowing backwards by a series of tiny valves that open and close to let blood through.
If the valves weaken or are damaged, the blood can flow backwards and collect in the vein, eventually causing it to be swollen and enlarged (varicose).
Certain things can increase your chances of developing varicose veins, such as:
being female
having a close family member with varicose veins
being older
being overweight
having a job that involves long periods of standing
being pregnant
other conditions
Read about the causes of varicose veins.
Treating varicose veins
If treatment is necessary, your doctor may first recommend using compression stockings, taking regular exercise and elevating the affected area when resting.
If your varicose veins are still causing you pain or discomfort, or they cause complications, they can be treated in several ways.
The most common treatment options include:
endothermal ablation – where heat is used to seal affected veins
sclerotherapy – this uses special foam to close the veins
ligation and stripping – the affected veins are surgically removed
It's unlikely you'll receive treatment on the NHS for cosmetic reasons – you'll have to pay for cosmetic treatment privately.
If you do feel you require treatment, it might help if you print out treatment options for varicose veins to discuss with the GP.
Read about:
Treating varicose veins 
Complications of varicose veins
Preventing varicose veins
There's little evidence to suggest you can stop varicose veins getting worse or completely stop new ones developing.
But there are ways to ease symptoms of existing varicose veins, such as:
avoiding standing or sitting still for long periods and trying to move around every 30 minutes
taking regular breaks throughout the day, raising the legs on pillows while resting to ease discomfort
exercising regularly – this can improve circulation and help maintain a healthy weight
Types of varicose veins
There are several types of varicose veins, such as:
trunk varicose veins – these are near to the surface of the skin and are thick and knobbly; they're often long and can look unpleasant
reticular varicose veins – these are red and sometimes grouped close together in a network
telangiectasia varicose veins – also known as thread veins or spider veins, these are small clusters of blue or red veins that sometimes appear on your face or legs; they're harmless and, unlike trunk varicose veins, do not bulge underneath the surface of the skin
Page last reviewed: 07 May 2020
Next review due: 07 May 2023
Next
:
Causes
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright