Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Short-sightedness (myopia)
Contents
Overview
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Short-sightedness, or myopia, is a very common eye condition that causes distant objects to appear blurred, while close objects can be seen clearly.
It's thought to affect up to 1 in 3 people in the UK and is becoming more common.
Short-sightedness can range from mild, where treatment may not be required, to severe, where a person's vision is significantly affected.
In children the condition can start from 6 to 13 years. During the teenage years when the body grows rapidly myopia may become worse. Myopia can occur in adults.
Signs that your child may be short-sighted can include:
needing to sit near the front of the class at school because they find it difficult to read the whiteboard
sitting close to the TV
complaining of headaches or tired eyes
regularly rubbing their eyes
Getting your eyes tested
If you think you or your child may be short-sighted, you should book an eye test at a local opticians. 
Find an opticians near you
You should have a routine eye test at least every 2 years, but you can have a test at any point if you have any concerns about your vision.
An eye test can confirm whether you're short or long-sighted, and you can be given a prescription for glasses or contact lenses to correct your vision.
For some people, such as children under 16 or those under 19 and in full-time education, eye tests are available free of charge on the NHS.
Read about NHS eyecare entitlements to check if you qualify.
Read more about diagnosing short-sightedness.
What causes short-sightedness?
Short-sightedness usually occurs when the eyes grow slightly too long.
This means that light doesn't focus on the light-sensitive tissue (retina) at the back of the eye properly.
Instead, the light rays focus just in front of the retina, resulting in distant objects appearing blurred.
It's not clear exactly why this happens, but it often runs in families and has been linked to focusing on nearby objects, such as books and computers, for long periods during childhood.
Ensuring your child regularly spends time playing outside may help to reduce their risk of becoming short-sighted.
Read more about the causes of short-sightedness.
Treatments for short-sightedness
Short-sightedness can usually be corrected effectively with a number of treatments.
The main treatments are:
corrective lenses – such as glasses or contact lenses to help the eyes focus on distant objects
laser eye surgery to alter the shape of the eye – this isn't usually available on the NHS and shouldn't be carried out on children, whose eyes are still developing
artificial lens implants – where a man-made lens is permanently inserted into the eyes to help them focus correctly; these also aren't usually available on the NHS
Read more about treating short-sightedness.
Associated eye conditions
Some adults with severe short-sightedness and young children with untreated short-sightedness are more likely to develop other eye problems.
These can include:
a squint – a common childhood condition where the eyes point in different directions
a lazy eye – a childhood condition where the vision in one eye doesn't develop properly
glaucoma – increased pressure inside the eyes
cataracts – where cloudy patches develop inside the lens of the eye
retinal detachment – where the retina pulls away from the blood vessels that supply it with oxygen and nutrients
Page last reviewed: 30 July 2018
Next review due: 30 July 2021
Next
:
Causes
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright