Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Bartholin's cyst
Contents
Overview
Treatment
A Bartholin's cyst, also called a Bartholin's duct cyst, is a small fluid-filled sac just inside the opening of the vagina.
Symptoms of a Bartholin's cyst
You may feel a soft, painless lump. This does not usually cause any problems.
But if the cyst grows very large, it can become noticeable and uncomfortable. You may feel pain in the skin surrounding the vagina (vulva) when you walk, sit down or have sex.
The cyst can sometimes affect the outer pair of lips surrounding the vagina (labia majora). One side may look swollen or bigger than usual.
If the cyst becomes infected, it can cause a painful collection of pus (abscess) to develop in one of the Bartholin's glands.
Signs of an abscess include the affected area becoming red, swollen, tender and hot. It can also cause a high temperature.
When to see a GP
Small Bartholin's cysts are sometimes only found during a routine cervical screening test or an examination carried out for another reason.
Always see a GP if you develop a lump in the area around your vagina so they can confirm a diagnosis and rule out more serious conditions.
If they think the cyst or one of your Bartholin's glands may be infected, they may use a swab to remove a sample of discharge for analysis to identify the bacteria responsible.
Sometimes, a GP may recommend you have a biopsy. A small sample of cyst tissue will be removed and examined under a microscope to check for signs of a rare type of vulval cancer called Bartholin's gland cancer.
What causes Bartholin's cysts?
The Bartholin's glands are a pair of pea-sized glands found just behind and either side of the lips that surround the entrance to the vagina.
The glands are not usually noticeable because they're rarely larger than 1cm (0.4 inches) across.
The Bartholin's glands secrete fluid that acts as a lubricant during sex. The fluid travels down tiny tubes called ducts into the vagina.
If the ducts become blocked, they can fill with fluid and expand to form a cyst.
It's often not known why the ducts become blocked, but sometimes it's linked to sexually transmitted bacterial infections (STIs), such as gonorrhoea or chlamydia, or other bacterial infections, such as Escherichia coli (E. coli).
How Bartholin's cysts are treated
If you do not have any noticeable symptoms, it's unlikely you'll need treatment.
If the cyst is painful, a GP may recommend some simple self-care measures, such as soaking the cyst in warm water several times a day for 3 or 4 days and taking painkillers you can buy from a pharmacy or supermarket.
If these do not work, several treatments are available to treat the pain and any infection. If necessary, the cyst can be drained. Most of these treatments involve a minor surgical procedure.
A Bartholin's cyst can sometimes return after treatment.
Who's affected
A Bartholin's cyst usually affects sexually active women aged 20 to 30.
Bartholin's cysts do not usually affect children because the Bartholin's glands do not start functioning until puberty. 
The cysts are also uncommon after the menopause as this usually causes the Bartholin's glands to shrink.
Preventing Bartholin's cysts
It's not clear exactly why Bartholin's cysts develop, so it's not usually possible to prevent them.
But as some are thought to be linked to STIs, practising safe sex (using a condom every time you have sex) can help reduce your chances of developing Bartholin's cysts .
Get more advice about STIs
Page last reviewed: 26 October 2021
Next review due: 26 October 2024
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright