Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis versicolor is a common fungal skin infection. It's sometimes also called tinea versicolor. A GP can prescribe treatment for it, but it can keep coming back.
Pityriasis versicolor is different to pityriasis rosea.
Check if you have pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis versicolor causes patches of skin to change colour.
On white skin, the patches are usually pink, red or pale brown. You may notice the patches do not tan in the sun.
On brown or black skin, the patches tend to be paler than the surrounding skin.
The patches usually appear on the chest, upper back, upper arms, neck or tummy.
The patches are flat and round and can join up to form large areas. They may look scaly and can sometimes be itchy.
If you're not sure it's pityriasis versicolor
Other conditions can have similar symptoms to pityriasis versicolor.
For example, discoloured patches could be vitiligo, and flaky, raised patches could be psoriasis.
Do not try to diagnose the problem yourself – see a GP if you're worried.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
patches of your skin have changed colour – if it's pityriasis versicolor, it will usually only go away if treated
you have any other changes to your skin you're worried about
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
A GP can prescribe treatment for pityriasis versicolor.
The main treatments are:
antifungal shampoo (such as ketoconazole) that you use on the affected skin and rinse off after a few minutes
antifungal cream
If pityriasis versicolor covers a large area, or shampoos and creams do not work, a GP may prescribe antifungal tablets.
It can take a few months for the skin to return to its usual colour after treatment and the patches can come back.
If they come back, you may need the same treatment again or your GP may suggest long-term treatment such as using antifungal shampoo every few weeks.
How you get pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis versicolor is caused by a type of fungus that lives on the skin.
Most people have this fungus on their skin without it causing any problems. But sometimes it can grow and spread more than usual, causing pityriasis versicolor.
It’s not always clear why this happens. It’s not caused by not washing your skin and most people who have it are otherwise healthy.
Pityriasis versicolor cannot spread from person to person.
Page last reviewed: 15 March 2022
Next review due: 15 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright