Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Tics
Contents
Overview
Treatment
Tics are fast, repetitive muscle movements that result in sudden and difficult to control body jolts or sounds.
They're fairly common in childhood and typically first appear at around 5 years of age. Very occasionally they can start in adulthood.
Tics are not usually serious and normally improve over time. But they can be frustrating and interfere with everyday activities.
Tourette's syndrome, a term that's used when tics have lasted for more than a year, is covered separately.
Types of tics
There are many types of tic. Some affect body movement (motor tics) and others result in a sound (vocal or phonic tics).
Examples of tics include:
blinking, wrinkling the nose or grimacing
jerking or banging the head
clicking the fingers
touching other people or things
coughing, grunting or sniffing
repeating a sound or phrase – in a small number of cases, this may be something obscene or offensive
Tics can happen randomly and they may be associated with something such as stress, anxiety, tiredness, excitement or happiness. They tend to get worse if they're talked about or focused on.
They often start with an unpleasant sensation that builds up in the body until relieved by the tic – known as an urge – although they can sometimes be partly suppressed.
When to see a GP
Tics are not usually serious and they do not damage the brain.
You do not always need to see a GP if they're mild and not causing problems. Sometimes they can disappear as quickly as they appear.
See a GP if you're concerned about your or your child's tics, you need support or advice, or the tics:
occur very regularly, or become more frequent or severe
cause emotional or social problems, such as embarrassment, bullying or social isolation
cause pain or discomfort (some tics can cause the person to accidentally hurt themselves)
interfere with daily activities, school or work
are accompanied by anger, depression or self harm
A GP should be able to diagnose a tic from a description of it and, if possible, seeing it. Recording a short video can be helpful, but be careful not to draw too much attention to the tic while filming as this can make it worse.
Treatments for tics
Treatment is not always needed if a tic is mild and is not causing any other problems. Self-help tips, such as avoiding stress or tiredness, are often very helpful for the majority of people.
If a tic is more severe and is affecting everyday activities, therapies that aim to reduce how often tics occur may be recommended.
The main therapies for tics are:
Habit reversal therapy – this aims to help you or your child learn intentional movements that "compete" with tics, so the tic cannot happen at the same time
Comprehensive behavioural intervention for tics (CBiT) – a set of behavioural techniques to help learn skills to reduce tics
Exposure with response prevention (ERP) – this aims to help you or your child get used to the unpleasant sensations that are often felt just before a tic, which can stop the tic occurring
There are also medicines that can help reduce tics. These may be used alongside psychological therapies or after trying these therapies unsuccessfully.
Read more about how tics are treated.
How long do tics last?
In most cases, tics improve over time or stop completely.
Sometimes they may just last a few months, but often they come and go over several years.
They are normally most severe from around 8 years of age until teenage years, and usually start to improve after puberty.
Causes of tics
It's not clear what causes tics. They're thought to be due to changes in the parts of the brain that control movement.
They can run in families, and there's likely to be a genetic cause in many cases. They also often happen alongside other conditions, such as:
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
Tics can sometimes be triggered by taking illegal drugs, such as cocaine or amphetamines, and are occasionally caused by more serious health conditions such as cerebral palsy or Huntington's disease.
Page last reviewed: 30 December 2019
Next review due: 30 December 2022
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright