Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) is a bacterial infection that can cause a number of serious illnesses, particularly in young children.
Hib infections used to be a serious health problem in the UK, but the routine immunisation against Hib, given to babies since 1992, means these infections are now rare.
Of the small number of cases that do occur nowadays, most affect adults with long-term underlying medical conditions, rather than young children.
Problems caused by Hib
Hib bacteria can cause several serious infections, including:
meningitis – infection of the lining of the brain and spinal cord
sepsis – blood poisoning
pneumonia – infection of the lungs 
pericarditis – infection of the lining surrounding the heart 
epiglottitis – infection of the epiglottis, the flap that covers the entrance to your windpipe 
septic arthritis – infection of the joints
cellulitis – infection of the skin and underlying tissues 
osteomyelitis – infection of the bones
Many children who develop Hib infections become very ill and need treatment with antibiotics in hospital.
Meningitis is the most severe illness caused by Hib. Even with treatment, 1 in every 20 children with Hib meningitis will die.
Those who survive may have long-term problems, such as hearing loss, seizures and learning disabilities.
How Hib is spread
Hib bacteria can live in the nose and throat of healthy people, and usually do not cause any symptoms.
The bacteria are usually spread in a similar way to cold and flu viruses, through infected droplets of fluid in coughs and sneezes.
The bacteria can be spread by healthy people who carry the bacteria, as well as those who are ill with a Hib infection.
Inhaling the infected droplets or transferring them into your mouth from a contaminated surface can allow the bacteria to spread further into your body, causing one of the infections mentioned above.
Hib vaccination
Vaccinating children against Hib has been very effective in cutting rates of Hib infections.
From more than 800 confirmed cases a year in England in the early 1990s, there were only 10 cases of Hib infections in England in 2018.
The Hib vaccine is routinely offered to babies as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. 
Babies have 3 separate doses of Hib vaccine – at 8, 12 and 16 weeks of age – as part of the combined 6-in-1 vaccine.
A booster dose is also offered when a child is 1 year old as part of the combined Hib/MenC booster to provide longer-term protection.
Page last reviewed: 27 August 2019
Next review due: 27 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright