Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Cough
A cough will usually clear up on its own within 3 to 4 weeks.
Important:
Could it be coronavirus (COVID-19)?
A new, continuous cough could be COVID-19.
Get advice about symptoms of COVID-19 and what to do
How you can treat a cough yourself
There's usually no need to see a GP.
You should:
rest
drink plenty of fluids
You could also try:
paracetamol or ibuprofen to treat any pain
hot lemon and honey (not suitable for babies under 1 year old)
a herbal medicine called pelargonium (suitable for people aged 12 or over)
But there's limited evidence to show these work.
How to make a hot lemon and honey drink
Hot lemon with honey has a similar effect to cough medicines.
A pharmacist can help if you have a cough
If you have a cough, you can ask a pharmacist about:
cough syrup
cough medicine (some cough medicines should not be given to children under 12)
cough sweets
These will not stop your cough, but may help you cough less.
Decongestants and cough medicines containing codeine will not stop your cough.
Information:
Call a pharmacy or contact them online before going in person. You can get medicines delivered or ask someone to collect them.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you've had a cough for more than 3 weeks (persistent cough)
your cough is very bad or quickly gets worse – for example, you have a hacking cough or cannot stop coughing
you feel very unwell
you have chest pain
you're losing weight for no reason
the side of your neck feels swollen and painful (swollen glands)
you find it hard to breathe
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because of chemotherapy or diabetes
See a GP urgently if you're coughing up blood.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
To find out what's causing your cough, the GP might:
take a sample of any mucus you might be coughing up
order an X-ray, allergy test, or a test to see how well your lungs work
refer you to hospital to see a specialist, but this is rare
Important
Antibiotics are not normally prescribed for coughs. A GP will only prescribe them if you need them – for example, if you have a bacterial infection or you're at risk of complications.
What causes coughs
Most coughs are caused by a cold or flu.
Other causes include:
smoking
heartburn (acid reflux)
allergies – for example, hay fever
infections like bronchitis
mucus dripping down the throat from the back of the nose
A cough is rarely a sign of something serious like lung cancer.
Video: coughs
In this video, a GP describes the most common causes of coughs and how they can be treated.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 May 2021
Media review due: 1 May 2024
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 12 January 2021
Next review due: 12 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright