Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hip pain in children (irritable hip)
Hip pain in children is most often caused by a condition called irritable hip, which usually gets better on its own. But it should always be checked because it could be a sign of something serious.
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or go to A&E if:
your child gets sudden pain in their hip, thigh or knee (hip problems can sometimes be felt in the thigh or knee)
your child is limping or cannot put any weight on 1 leg
They may have irritable hip (inflammation of the hip joint).
Although this is painful, it is not usually serious and can get better by itself.
But they should be checked to rule out anything like a broken bone or infected joint (septic arthritis).
Find an A&E department
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
To find out what's causing your child's pain, a doctor or nurse may:
look at and feel your child's hip, leg or knee
try gently moving the leg in different directions
ask about any recent injuries or illnesses
arrange an X-ray
Sometimes a blood test or other scans may also be done to confirm it's nothing serious.
Treatment for irritable hip
Irritable hip normally gets better in 1 or 2 weeks and does not cause lasting problems.
You can usually look after your child at home. Sometimes they may need to stay in hospital for a few days if they're in a lot of pain.
While looking after your child at home:
Do
make sure they rest their leg until they're feeling better – keep them off nursery or school until they're recovered
give them children's ibuprofen or paracetamol for their pain
attend any follow-up appointments recommended by your doctor or nurse
Don’t
do not let them do any activities that could put a lot of strain on their hip for at least 2 weeks – they can gradually return to their normal activities once they're feeling better (swimming is a good way to get the joint moving again)
Urgent advice:
Take your child back to the GP or hospital if:
their pain is getting worse or has not improved
they get a high temperature or feel hot and shivery
they're still in pain after 2 weeks
their pain went away but has come back
This might mean they have a more serious problem.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Page last reviewed: 05 February 2021
Next review due: 05 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright