Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Glomerulonephritis
Contents
Overview
Treatment
Glomerulonephritis is damage to the tiny filters inside your kidneys (the glomeruli). It's often caused by your immune system attacking healthy body tissue.
Glomerulonephritis does not usually cause any noticeable symptoms. It's more likely to be diagnosed when blood or urine tests are carried out for another reason.
Although mild cases of glomerulonephritis can be treated effectively, for some people the condition can lead to long-term kidney problems.
Symptoms of glomerulonephritis
In severe cases of glomerulonephritis, you may see blood in your urine. However, this is usually noticed when a urine sample is tested.
Your urine may be frothy if it contains a large amount of protein.
If a lot of protein leaks into your urine, swelling of the legs or other parts of the body can also develop. This is known as nephrotic syndrome.
Depending on your type of glomerulonephritis, other parts of your body can be affected and cause symptoms such as:
rashes
joint pain
breathing problems
tiredness
Many people with glomerulonephritis also have high blood pressure.
When to get medical advice
See a GP if you notice blood in your urine. This does not always mean you have glomerulonephritis, but the cause should be investigated.
If the GP suspects glomerulonephritis, they'll usually arrange:
a blood test – to measure your creatinine level
a urine test – to check for blood or protein in your urine
If you do have glomerulonephritis, further blood tests may be needed to help find out the cause.
If your kidney problem needs to be investigated further, it may be recommended that you have:
an ultrasound scan – this is to check the size of your kidneys, make sure there are no blockages, and look for any other problems
a biopsy – this is to remove a small sample of kidney tissue, carried out using local anaesthetic to numb the area; an ultrasound machine locates your kidneys and a small needle is used to take a sample
Causes of glomerulonephritis
Glomerulonephritis is often caused by a problem with your immune system. Sometimes it's part of a condition such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or vasculitis.
In some cases, it can be caused by infections, such as:
HIV
hepatitis B and hepatitis C
infection of the heart valves (endocarditis)
In most cases, glomerulonephritis does not run in families.
If you're diagnosed with an inherited type of glomerulonephritis, a doctor can advise you about the chances of someone else in your family being affected.
They may recommend screening, which can identify people who may be at increased risk of developing the condition.
Treating glomerulonephritis
Treatment for glomerulonephritis depends on the cause and severity of your condition. Mild cases may not need any treatment.
Treatment can be as simple as making changes to your diet, such as eating less salt to reduce the strain on your kidneys.
Medicine to lower blood pressure, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, is commonly prescribed because it helps protect the kidneys.
If the condition is caused by a problem with your immune system, medicine called immunosuppressants may be used.
Read about treating glomerulonephritis
Complications of glomerulonephritis
Although treatment for glomerulonephritis is effective in many cases, further problems can sometimes develop.
These include:
high blood pressure
high cholesterol
blood clots – including deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or a pulmonary embolism
damage to other organs
chronic kidney disease
kidney failure
If you're diagnosed with glomerulonephritis, a doctor may prescribe medicine to help lower your blood pressure, lower your cholesterol or protect against blood clots.
Page last reviewed: 05 December 2019
Next review due: 05 December 2022
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright