Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Non-allergic rhinitis
Contents
Overview
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Non-allergic rhinitis is inflammation of the inside of the nose that is not caused by an allergy.
Rhinitis that is caused by something that triggers an allergy, such as pollen, is a separate health condition known as allergic rhinitis.
Symptoms of non-allergic rhinitis can include:
a blocked nose
a runny nose 
sneezing – although this is generally less severe than in allergic rhinitis
mild irritation or discomfort in and around your nose
reduced sense of smell
In rare cases, non-allergic rhinitis can also cause a crust to develop inside the nose, which may:
produce a foul-smelling odour
cause bleeding if you try to remove it
When to see your GP
See your GP if you have symptoms of non-allergic rhinitis and they're affecting your quality of life.
Non-allergic rhinitis can be difficult to diagnose, as there is no test to confirm it. Your GP will first ask about your symptoms and medical history.
They may then carry out a blood test to check if you have an allergy, or they may refer you to a hospital clinic for more specific tests for allergies, including a "skin prick test".
If the test results suggest you do not have an allergy, you may be diagnosed with non-allergic rhinitis.
Read more about diagnosing non-allergic rhinitis.
What causes non-allergic rhinitis?
In non-allergic rhinitis, the inflammation is usually the result of swollen blood vessels and a build-up of fluid in the tissues of the nose.
This swelling blocks the nasal passages and stimulates the mucus glands in the nose, resulting in the typical symptoms of a blocked or runny nose.
There are several possible causes of non-allergic rhinitis including:
viral infections, such as a cold – these attack the lining of the nose and throat
environmental factors – such as extreme temperatures, humidity or exposure to noxious fumes, such as smoke
hormone imbalances – such as during pregnancy or puberty
hormone-containing medicines such as HRT or the contraceptive pill
Read more about the causes of non-allergic rhinitis.
Treating non-allergic rhinitis
Non-allergic rhinitis is not usually harmful but it can be irritating and affect your quality of life. The best treatment depends on how severe the rhinitis is and what's causing it.
In some cases, avoiding certain triggers and undertaking self care measures, like rinsing your nasal passages, may relieve your symptoms.
Rinsing your nasal passages, can be done using either a homemade solution or a solution made with sachets of ingredients bought from a pharmacy. 
In other cases, you may need to take a medicine, such as a nasal spray containing steroids. Steroid nasal sprays help to relieve the congestion, but you need to use them over a number of weeks for them to work properly.
Read more about treating non-allergic rhinitis.
Further problems
In some cases, non-allergic rhinitis can lead to complications. These include:
nasal polyps – harmless sacs of fluid that grow inside the nasal passages and sinuses
sinusitis – an infection caused by nasal inflammation and swelling that prevents mucus draining from the sinuses
middle ear infections – infection of part of the ear located directly behind the eardrum
These problems can often be treated with medication, although surgery is sometimes needed in severe or long-term cases.
Read more about the complications of non-allergic rhinitis.
Page last reviewed: 03 May 2019
Next review due: 03 May 2022
Next
:
Causes
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright