Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Ovulation pain
Some women get a one-sided pain in their lower abdomen when they ovulate.
It happens about 14 days before your period, when an ovary releases an egg as part of the menstrual cycle.
It's also known as mittelschmerz (German for "middle pain" or "pain in the middle of the month").
Ovulation pain is often normal and just another side effect linked with periods.
Symptoms of ovulation pain
The pain can be a dull cramp or a sharp and sudden twinge.
It's usually on either the left- or right-hand side of your tummy depending on which ovary is releasing the egg.
It can last just a few minutes or continue for a day or 2. Some women notice a little vaginal bleeding when it happens.
When to see your doctor
See your GP if the pain is severe or you're worried.
It's a good idea to keep a diary before your visit. Let the doctor know exactly when during your menstrual cycle the pain comes on and how long it lasts.
Treatments for painful ovulation
Painful ovulation can usually be eased by simple remedies like soaking in a hot bath or taking an over-the-counter painkiller, such as paracetamol.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen may also help, but you should not take them if you're trying to get pregnant as they can interfere with ovulation.
If you're in a lot of discomfort, talk to your GP about other treatment options.
Birth control methods that stop ovulation, such as the contraceptive pill or contraceptive implant, can completely banish ovulation pain.
Is ovulation pain anything to worry about?
Painful ovulation is fairly common and usually harmless. But it can sometimes be a symptom of an underlying medical condition.
Some of the underlying causes can result in fertility problems that can prevent you getting pregnant:
endometriosis – an inflammatory disease that affects the ovaries and fallopian tubes that can also cause pain during ovulation
scar tissue – if you've had surgery (for example, a caesarean section or your appendix out), scar tissue can cause ovulation pain by restricting the ovaries and surrounding structures
sexually transmitted infections (STIs) – STIs like chlamydia can cause inflammation and scarring around the fallopian tubes, leading to ovulation pain
Why does ovulation pain happen?
Nobody is sure, but one theory is that ovulation pain is the egg breaking through the ovary wall, which releases a small amount of fluid (or sometimes a small amount of blood) that irritates nearby nerves.
Page last reviewed: 02 August 2019
Next review due: 02 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright