Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Meningitis
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Treatment
Complications
Vaccination
Meningitis is an infection of the protective membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (meninges).
It can affect anyone, but is most common in babies, young children, teenagers and young adults.
Meningitis can be very serious if not treated quickly.
It can cause life-threatening blood poisoning (septicaemia) and result in permanent damage to the brain or nerves.
A number of vaccinations are available that offer some protection against meningitis.
Symptoms of meningitis
Symptoms of meningitis develop suddenly and can include:
a high temperature (fever)
being sick
a headache
a rash that does not fade when a glass is rolled over it (but a rash will not always develop)
a stiff neck
a dislike of bright lights
drowsiness or unresponsiveness
seizures (fits)
These symptoms can appear in any order. You do not always get all the symptoms.
Important:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
At the moment it can be hard to know what to do if your child is unwell. 
It's important to trust your instincts and get medical help if you need it.
When to get medical help
You should get medical advice as soon as possible if you're concerned that you or your child could have meningitis.
Trust your instincts and do not wait until a rash develops.
Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest A&E immediately if you think you or your child might be seriously ill.
Call NHS 111 or your GP surgery for advice if you're not sure if it's anything serious or you think you may have been exposed to someone with meningitis.
How meningitis is spread
Meningitis is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection.
Bacterial meningitis is rarer but more serious than viral meningitis.
Infections that cause meningitis can be spread through:
sneezing
coughing
kissing
Meningitis is usually caught from people who carry these viruses or bacteria in their nose or throat but are not ill themselves.
It can also be caught from someone with meningitis, but this is less common.
Vaccinations against meningitis
Vaccinations offer some protection against certain causes of meningitis.
These include the:
meningitis B vaccine – offered to babies aged 8 weeks, followed by a second dose at 16 weeks and a booster at 1 year
6-in-1 vaccine – offered to babies at 8, 12 and 16 weeks of age
pneumococcal vaccine – offered to babies born before 1 January 2020 at 8 and 16 weeks and 1 year of age; babies born on or after 1 January 2020 have 2 doses at 12 weeks and 1 year
Hib/MenC vaccine – offered to babies at 1 year of age
MMR vaccine – offered to babies at 1 year and a second dose at 3 years and 4 months
meningitis ACWY vaccine – offered to teenagers, sixth formers and "fresher" students going to university for the first time
Treatments for meningitis
People with suspected meningitis will usually have tests in hospital to confirm the diagnosis and check whether the condition is the result of a viral or bacterial infection.
Bacterial meningitis usually needs to be treated in hospital for at least a week.
Treatments include:
antibiotics given directly into a vein
fluids given directly into a vein
oxygen through a face mask
Viral meningitis tends to get better on its own within 7 to 10 days and can often be treated at home.
Getting plenty of rest and taking painkillers and anti-sickness medication can help relieve the symptoms in the meantime.
Outlook for meningitis 
Viral meningitis will usually get better on its own and rarely causes any long-term problems.
Most people with bacterial meningitis who are treated quickly will also make a full recovery, although some are left with serious long-term problems.
These can include:
hearing loss or vision loss, which may be partial or total
problems with memory and concentration
recurrent seizures (epilepsy)
co-ordination, movement and balance problems
loss of limbs – amputation of affected limbs is sometimes necessary
Overall, it's estimated up to 1 in every 10 cases of bacterial meningitis is fatal.
Find out more about the complications of meningitis
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 08 March 2019
Next review due: 08 March 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright