Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Head and neck cancer
Head and neck cancer is a relatively uncommon type of cancer. Around 12,400 new cases are diagnosed in the UK each year.
There are more than 30 areas within the head and neck where cancer can develop, including the:
mouth and lips
voice box (larynx)
throat (pharynx)
salivary glands
nose and sinuses
area at the back of the nose and mouth (nasopharynx)
Oesophageal (gullet) cancer, thyroid cancer, brain tumours and eye cancer do not tend to be classified as a head and neck cancer.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: Coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer
Mouth cancer
Mouth cancer is the most common type of head and neck cancer.
It can affect a number of areas in and around the mouth, including the:
lips
tongue
inside of the cheeks
floor or roof of the mouth
gums
Symptoms of mouth cancer can include mouth ulcers and unexplained, persistent lumps in your mouth, both of which may be painful. 
Read more about mouth cancer.
Laryngeal cancer
Laryngeal cancer develops in the tissue of the larynx (voice box).
Symptoms of laryngeal cancer can include:
a change in the voice, such as persistent hoarseness
difficulty or pain when swallowing
noisy breathing
shortness of breath
a persistent cough
a lump or swelling in your neck
Read more about laryngeal cancer.
Throat cancers
Doctors do not tend to use the term "throat cancer", as the throat (pharynx) includes many different parts that can be affected by cancer.
The main areas that can be affected are the:
oropharynx – the part of the throat at the back of the mouth
hypopharynx – the part of the throat connecting the oropharynx to the gullet and windpipe
nasopharynx – the part of the throat that connects the back of the nose to the back of the mouth
The most common symptoms of cancer in the oropharynx or hypopharynx include a lump in the neck, a persistent sore throat and difficulty swallowing.
Read more about throat cancers:
Cancer Support UK: mouth and oropharyngeal cancer
Macmillan Cancer Support: oropharyngeal cancer
Salivary gland cancer
Salivary glands produce saliva, which keeps your mouth moist and helps with swallowing and digestion.
There are 3 main pairs of salivary glands. They are the:
parotid glands – located between your cheeks and your ears
sublingual glands – located under your tongue
submandibular glands – located under each side of your jawbone
Salivary gland cancer most commonly affects the parotid glands.
The main symptom of salivary gland cancer is a lump or swelling on or near your jaw, or in your mouth or neck. But most of these lumps are non-cancerous.
Other symptoms can include numbness in part of your face and drooping on one side of your face.
Read more about salivary gland cancer:
Cancer Research UK: salivary gland cancer
Macmillan Cancer Support: salivary gland cancer
Nasal and sinus cancer
Nasal and sinus cancer affects the nasal cavity (above the roof of your mouth) and the sinuses (the small, air-filled cavities inside the bones of the nose and within the cheekbones and forehead).
The symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer are similar to viral or bacterial infections, such as the common cold or sinusitis, and include:
a persistent blocked nose, which usually only affects 1 side
nosebleeds
a decreased sense of smell
mucus running from the nose or down the throat
Read more about nasal and sinus cancer.
Nasopharyngeal cancer
Nasopharyngeal cancer affects the part of the throat that connects the back of the nose to the back of the mouth. It's one of the rarest types of head and neck cancer in the UK.
Symptoms can include:
a lump in the neck, due to the cancer spreading to the lymph nodes (small glands that are part of the immune system) in the neck
a blocked or stuffy nose
nosebleeds
hearing loss (usually only in 1 ear)
Read more about nasopharyngeal cancer.
Further information
Macmillan Cancer Support: staging and grading of head and neck cancer
Page last reviewed: 28 October 2021
Next review due: 28 October 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright