Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hearing loss
Hearing loss is common, particularly as you get older. See a GP if you have problems with your hearing. It could be caused by something that can be easily treated.
Signs of hearing loss
It's not always easy to tell if you're losing your hearing.
Common signs include:
difficulty hearing other people clearly and misunderstanding what they say, especially in noisy places
asking people to repeat themselves
listening to music or watching TV with the volume higher than other people need
difficulty hearing on the phone
finding it hard to keep up with a conversation
feeling tired or stressed from having to concentrate while listening
Sometimes someone else might notice problems with your hearing before you do.
Information:
Hearing loss in babies
Hearing loss can be harder to spot in babies. There is a checklist for how a baby makes and reacts to sound on GOV.UK that can help you notice the signs.
Causes of hearing loss
There are lots of possible causes of hearing loss. It may be caused by something treatable or it may be permanent.
Your symptoms may give you an idea what could be causing it. But do not self-diagnose, see a GP for advice.
Common causes of hearing loss and related symptoms.
Symptoms Possible cause
Gradual hearing loss in both ears Aging or damage from loud noise over many years
Difficulty hearing in 1 ear, earache, a feeling of pressure in your ear, discharge coming out of the ear Ear infection
Difficulty hearing in 1 ear, itchiness, feeling like your ear is blocked Earwax build-up
Sudden hearing loss after an ear infection, a very loud noise or a change in air pressure (for example, from flying) Perforated eardrum
Sudden hearing loss along with dizziness, a spinning sensation (vertigo) or ringing in your ears (tinnitus) Labyrinthitis or Ménière's disease
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you think your hearing is getting gradually worse
you've had treatment for an ear infection or earwax build-up but your hearing has not come back
You can also sometimes get a free hearing test at some pharmacies and opticians.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have sudden hearing loss in 1 or both ears
your hearing has been getting worse over the last few days or weeks
you have hearing loss along with other symptoms, such as earache or discharge coming out of the ear
It might not be anything serious, but it's best to get help as it may need to be treated quickly.
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Treatments for hearing loss
Treatment for hearing loss depends on what's causing it.
Sometimes a GP may be able to treat the cause, for example:
an ear infection might be treated with antibiotics
an earwax build-up might be treated with ear drops or removed
If your hearing loss is not caused by something a GP can treat, they may refer you to a hearing specialist for further tests and treatment.
Hearing aids and implants
If you have permanent hearing loss, a specialist will often recommend hearing aids. These will not make your hearing perfect, but they make sounds louder and clearer.
Some people may need a hearing implant. These are devices that are attached to your skull or placed deep inside your ear.
Find out more about hearing aids and implants
Things you can do if you have hearing loss
If you have hearing loss, there are things you can do to help you communicate with others and avoid more damage to your hearing.
Do
reduce background noise or move to a quieter area when talking to other people
face people when they're talking to you, so you can see their mouth, facial expressions and gestures
ask people to repeat themselves, speak more slowly or write things down if you need to
wear ear protection when exposed to loud noises
Don’t
do not listen to music too loudly – the volume should be just high enough for you to hear it comfortably
do not put your fingers or any objects like cotton buds in your ears, even if you think they might be blocked
Information:
More advice from RNID
RNID: communication tips if you have hearing loss
RNID: how to communicate with someone who is deaf or has hearing loss
Page last reviewed: 06 December 2021
Next review due: 06 December 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright