Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Dehydration
Dehydration means your body loses more fluids than you take in. If it's not treated, it can get worse and become a serious problem.
Important
Babies, children and the elderly are more at risk of dehydration.
Check if you're dehydrated
Symptoms of dehydration in adults and children include:
feeling thirsty
dark yellow and strong-smelling pee
feeling dizzy or lightheaded
feeling tired
a dry mouth, lips and eyes
peeing little, and fewer than 4 times a day
Dehydration can happen more easily if you have:
diabetes
vomiting or diarrhoea
been in the sun too long (heatstroke)
drunk too much alcohol
sweated too much after exercising
a high temperature of 38C or more
been taking medicines that make you pee more (diuretics)
How you can reduce the risk of dehydration
Drink fluids when you feel any dehydration symptoms.
If you find it hard to drink because you feel sick or have been sick, start with small sips and then gradually drink more.
You can use a spoon to make it easier for your child to swallow the fluids.
You should drink enough during the day so your pee is a pale clear colour.
Drink when there's a higher risk of dehydrating. For example, if you're vomiting, sweating or you have diarrhoea.
Video: how to prevent dehydration
This video shows you how you can reduce the risk of dehydration.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 July 2020
Media review due: 1 July 2023
Carers: making sure someone drinks enough
Sometimes people you care for do not have a sense of how much they're drinking.
To help them:
make sure they drink during mealtimes
make drinking a social thing, like "having a cup of tea"
offer them food with a high water content – for example, soups, ice cream or jellies, or fruits like melon
A pharmacist can help with dehydration
If you're being sick or have diarrhoea and are losing too much fluid, you need to put back the sugar, salts and minerals that your body has lost.
Your pharmacist can recommend oral rehydration sachets. These are powders that you mix with water and then drink.
Ask your pharmacist which ones are right for you or your child.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your symptoms do not improve with treatment
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you're feeling unusually tired
you're confused and disorientated
any dizziness when you stand up does not go away
you have not peed all day
your pulse is weak or rapid
you have fits (seizures)
These can be signs of serious dehydration that need urgent treatment.
Under-5s with dehydration
The under-5s should get plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration.
It's quite common for young children to become dehydrated. It can be serious if it's not dealt with quickly.
Urgent advice:
Take your baby or child to the GP urgently or go to A&E if they:
seem drowsy
breathe fast
have few or no tears when they cry
have a soft spot on their head that sinks inwards (sunken fontanelle)
have a dry mouth
have dark yellow pee or have not had a pee in last 12 hours
have cold and blotchy-looking hands and feet
Once the dehydration has been treated, your child will need to maintain their fluid levels.
GPs usually advise:
Do
carry on breastfeeding or using formula – try to give small amounts more often than usual
for babies on formula or solid foods – give them small sips of extra water
give small children their usual diet
give regular small sips of rehydration solution to replace lost fluids, salts and sugars – ask your pharmacist to recommend one
Don’t
do not make formula weaker
do not give young children fruit juice or fizzy drinks – it makes things like diarrhoea or vomiting worse
Page last reviewed: 09 August 2019
Next review due: 09 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright