Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger)
Herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger) is a painful infection of the finger caused by the herpes virus. It's easily treated but can come back.
Check if you have herpetic whitlow
A herpetic whitlow can appear anywhere on your finger, but it usually affects the top of your finger (fingertip).
Symptoms of herpetic whitlow include:
swelling and pain in your finger
blisters or sores on your finger
skin becoming red or darker than your usual skin tone
A red, swollen and painful finger.
Credit:
Blisters or sores on your finger.
Credit:
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you think you have herpetic whitlow
Treatment is more effective if started early and will help stop the infection spreading.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
You may be prescribed antiviral tablets if you see a GP within 48 hours of your symptoms showing.
Antiviral tablets can help your finger to heal more quickly.
If you cannot see a GP within 48 hours, the infection will go away without treatment within 2 to 4 weeks. But there are things you can do yourself to help.
Things you can do to help herpetic whitlow
Do
keep your finger clean and covered with a dressing
take painkillers such as ibuprofen or paracetamol to ease the pain
Don’t
do not touch your finger – the infection can spread easily
do not touch other parts of your body or other people with your infected finger
do not try to drain the fluid – this can cause the infection to spread
do not use contact lenses – you could spread the infection to your eye
If your infection gets worse
Go back to the GP if your infection gets worse or if you have a very high temperature (you feel hot and shivery).
Causes of herpetic whitlow
Herpetic whitlow is caused by a virus called herpes simplex. You can get it if you touch a cold sore or blister of another infected person.
You're more likely to get herpetic whitlow if you've had cold sores or genital herpes.
You may also get it if you have a weakened immune system – for example, if you have diabetes or you're having chemotherapy.
The first time you have herpetic whitlow will usually be the most severe.
Herpetic whitlow can come back
Once you have the virus, it stays in your body for the rest of your life.
The condition is rare, but if you get it once you can get it again. For example, it might come back if you have a cut or sore on your finger, or if you're feeling stressed or unwell.
There's not much you can do to prevent herpetic whitlow but it can be treated in the same way if it comes back.
Page last reviewed: 06 November 2020
Next review due: 06 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright