Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
What is diabetic eye screening?
-
Diabetic eye screening
Contents
What is diabetic eye screening?
How to book a test
What happens
Your result
Diabetic eye screening is a test to check for eye problems caused by diabetes.
Eye problems caused by diabetes are called diabetic retinopathy. This can lead to sight loss if it's not found early.
The eye screening test can find problems before they affect your sight.
Pictures are taken of the back of your eyes to check for any changes.
If you have diabetes and you're aged 12 or over, you'll get a letter asking you to have your eyes checked at least once a year.
Information:
You can get other versions of diabetic eye screening information, including an easy read guide, an audio guide and guides in other languages.
Important:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update
Diabetic eye screening services are now running.
You'll be invited when your next screening appointment is due.
Contact your GP surgery or optician online or by phone if you have diabetes and are worried about your sight.
It's important to go to your appointment unless you have symptoms of COVID-19. All NHS services are making sure it's safe for you to attend.
Video: diabetic eye screening
This video shows what happens when you go for diabetic eye screening and why you need regular eye checks.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 November 2021
Media review due: 1 November 2024
Help us improve our services
Can you answer some questions about your experiences with bowel screening to help us improve our services?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 23 May 2019
Next review due: 23 May 2022
Next
:
How to book a test
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright