Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Post-herpetic neuralgia
Contents
Overview
Treatment
Post-herpetic neuralgia is a lasting pain in the areas of your skin where you had shingles.
Around one in five people with shingles will get post-herpetic neuralgia. People age 50 and over are particularly at risk.
Many people with post-herpetic neuralgia make a full recovery within a year. But symptoms occasionally last for several years or may be permanent.
Symptoms of post-herpetic neuralgia
The main symptom of post-herpetic neuralgia is intermittent or continuous nerve pain in an area of your skin previously affected by shingles.
The pain may come and go or be continuous. It can be described as burning, stabbing, shooting, aching, throbbing or like electric shocks.
The affected area may also:
feel intensely itchy
be more sensitive to pain than usual
feel painful as a result of something that would not normally hurt, such as a light touch or cool breeze
When to see your GP
See your GP if you have ongoing pain after having shingles. They can advise you about treatment options, including medicines you can only get on prescription.
Treatments for post-herpetic neuralgia
Medicines can ease the symptoms of post-herpetic neuralgia, although they may not relieve the pain completely.
Widely available painkillers, such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, do not usually help, so your doctor may prescribe a different type of painkiller.
Some medicines used to treat depression also work for nerve pain and are sometimes used for post-herpetic neuralgia.

Read more about treatments for post-herpetic neuralgia
Causes of post-herpetic neuralgia
The varicella zoster virus causes both chickenpox and shingles.
In post-herpetic neuralgia, the virus causes inflammation of the nerves under the skin of the affected area. Neuralgia is a medical term for pain resulting from nerve inflammation or damage.
It's not clear why some people with shingles develop post-herpetic neuralgia, but increasing age, pain during the early stage of shingles and severe pain throughout an episode of shingles are all associated with an increased risk of the condition.
Preventing post-herpetic neuralgia
There's no definite way to prevent post-herpetic neuralgia. But if shingles is treated early with antiviral medicine the risk of complications such as post-herpetic neuralgia is reduced.
If you develop symptoms such as pain or a rash that suggests shingles, see your GP as soon as possible to discuss taking an antiviral medicine.
Having the shingles vaccination will help you avoid getting the infection in the first place. If you've had shingles before, the vaccine will also reduce your risk of getting it again. It's available on the NHS to people in their 70s.
Page last reviewed: 19 January 2021
Next review due: 19 January 2024
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright