Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Breast pain
There are many reasons breasts can be painful. Breast pain by itself is unlikely to be a symptom of cancer.
Breast pain is usually linked to periods
Symptoms of breast pain caused by periods:
dull, heavy or aching pain – from mild to very bad
pain that begins up to 2 weeks before a period, gets worse and then goes away when the period ends
usually (but not always) affects both breasts and sometimes pain spreads to the armpit
How to ease the pain yourself
Do
take paracetamol or ibuprofen, or rub painkilling gel on your breasts
wear a properly fitted bra during the day and a soft bra to sleep in
There's little evidence that vitamin E tablets or evening primrose oil help with breast pain.
Breast pain not linked to periods
Sometimes breast pain is caused by:
injuries or sprains to the neck, shoulder or back – these can also be felt as breast pain
medicines like the contraceptive pill and some antidepressants – check the side effects in the packet's information leaflet
conditions like mastitis or a breast abscess – these can cause breast pain along with other symptoms
pregnancy – breast pain can be an early sign
Breast pain and the menopause
Hormone changes during the menopause can cause breast pain.
Once the menopause is over (you've had 12 months without a period), the pain should not return.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP about breast pain if:
it's not improving or painkillers are not helping
you have a very high temperature or feel hot and shivery
any part of your breast is red, hot or swollen
there's a history of breast cancer in your family
you have any signs of pregnancy – you could do a pregnancy test first
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if:
there's a hard lump in your breast that does not move around
you get nipple discharge, which may be streaked with blood
one or both breasts change shape
the skin on your breast is dimpled (like orange peel)
you have a rash on or around your nipple, or the nipple has sunk into your breast
These can be signs of something more serious.
If you call 111, the trained adviser will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 22 June 2020
Next review due: 22 June 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright