Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hormone headaches
Many women experience headaches caused by changes in their hormones.
According to the National Migraine Centre, more than half of women who get migraines notice a link with their periods.
These so-called "menstrual migraines" tend to be particularly severe.
Migraine is most likely to develop in either the 2 days leading up to a period or the first 3 days during a period. This is because of the natural drop in oestrogen levels at these times.
The attacks are typically more severe than migraines at other times of the month and are more likely to come back the next day.
Periods are not the only trigger of hormone headaches.
Other causes include:
the combined pill (combined oral contraceptive pill) – some women find their headaches improve while they're on the pill, but others report more frequent attacks, especially in the pill-free week, when oestrogen levels drop
the menopause – headaches usually worsen as you approach the menopause, partly because periods come more often and partly because the normal hormone cycle is disrupted
pregnancy – headaches can get worse in the first few weeks of pregnancy, but they usually improve or stop completely during the last 6 months; they do not harm the baby
Signs of hormone headaches
It's worth keeping a diary for at least 3 menstrual cycles to help you check whether your migraines are linked to your periods.
If they're linked, a diary can help to pinpoint at what stage in your cycle you get a migraine.
The Migraine Trust website has a downloadable headache diary, which may be a useful tool.
Self-help tips for hormone headaches
If keeping a diary reveals that your headaches develop just before your period, you can try these tips to help prevent a migraine:
Eat small, frequent snacks to keep your blood sugar level up. Missing meals or going too long without food can trigger attacks. Have a small snack before going to bed, and always eat breakfast. Here are some healthy breakfast recipes
Have a regular sleep pattern, and avoid too much or too little sleep. Get a good night's sleep with 10 tips to beat insomnia
Avoid stress. If this proves difficult, find ways to deal with stress, such as taking regular exercise and using relaxation strategies. Use these 10 stress busters
Treatments for hormone headaches
Migraine treatments
Your doctor can also prescribe migraine medicines for you to take around the time of your period.
These do not contain hormones, but they can help stop the headaches developing.
They include tablets called triptans and a type of painkiller called mefenamic acid.
Continuous contraceptive pills
Talk to your doctor if you think your contraceptive pills are making your migraines worse.
If you have headaches during the days you do not take the pills, you can avoid the sudden fall in oestrogen by taking several packs continuously without a break.
Find out more about the combined contraceptive pill
Hormone replacement therapy
The hormone changes that happen as women approach the menopause mean that all types of headache, including migraines, become more common.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can be helpful to treat hot flushes and sweats.
But if you have migraines, it's best to use patches or a gel, as these types of HRT keep hormone levels more stable than tablets and are less likely to trigger migraines.
Oestrogen therapy
If you have regular periods, a doctor can prescribe an oestrogen gel or patch, which you use before your period is due and for a few days during your period.
But these are not commonly prescribed for hormone headaches.
Page last reviewed: 23 September 2021
Next review due: 23 September 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright