Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Sleep apnoea
Sleep apnoea is when your breathing stops and starts while you sleep. The most common type is called obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA).
Check if you have sleep apnoea
Symptoms of sleep apnoea mainly happen while you sleep.
They include:
breathing stopping and starting
making gasping, snorting or choking noises
waking up a lot
loud snoring
During the day, you may also:
feel very tired
find it hard to concentrate
have mood swings
have a headache when you wake up
Information:
It can be hard to tell if you have sleep apnoea. It may help to ask someone to stay with you while you sleep so they can check for the symptoms.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
You have any of the main symptoms of sleep apnoea:
your breathing stops and starts while you sleep
you make gasping, snorting or choking noises while you sleep
you always feel very tired during the day
If someone else has seen you have the symptoms, it can help to bring them with you.
Sleep apnoea can be serious if it's not diagnosed and treated.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Getting tested for sleep apnoea
If a GP thinks you might have sleep apnoea, they may refer you to a specialist sleep clinic for tests.
At the clinic, you may be given devices that check things like your breathing and heartbeat while you sleep.
You'll be asked to wear these overnight so doctors can check for signs of sleep apnoea.
You can usually do this at home, but sometimes you may need to stay in the clinic overnight.
The test can show if you have sleep apnoea and how severe it is. This is based on how often your breathing stops while you sleep (AHI score).
Understand your AHI score
Treatments for sleep apnoea
Sleep apnoea does not always need to be treated if it's mild.
But many people need to use a device called a CPAP machine. You'll be given this for free on the NHS if you need it.
CPAP machine
A CPAP machine gently pumps air into a mask you wear over your mouth or nose while you sleep.
It can help:
improve your breathing while you sleep by stopping your airways getting too narrow
improve the quality of your sleep and help you feel less tired
reduce the risk of problems linked to sleep apnoea (like high blood pressure)
Using a CPAP machine may feel strange or awkward at first, but try to keep using it. It works best if you use it every night.
Tell your doctor if you find it uncomfortable or hard to use.
Other treatments
Less common treatments for sleep apnoea include:
a gum shield-like device that holds your airways open while you sleep (mandibular advancement device)
surgery to help your breathing, such as removing large tonsils
These treatments may not work as well as a CPAP machine.
Information:
You can find out more about CPAP machines and other sleep apnoea treatments on the British Lung Foundation website.
Things you can do to help with sleep apnoea
If you have been diagnosed with sleep apnoea, there are some things you can do to help.
These may be all you need to do if your sleep apnoea is mild.
Do
try to lose weight if you're overweight
sleep on your side – try taping a tennis ball to the back of your sleepwear, or buy a special pillow or bed wedge to help keep you on your side
Don’t
do not smoke
do not drink too much alcohol – especially shortly before going to sleep
do not take sleeping pills unless recommended by a doctor – they can make sleep apnoea worse
Information:
The British Lung Foundation has local support groups and you can get travel advice from the British Snoring and Sleep Apnoea Association.
Sleep apnoea can cause other problems
Without treatment, sleep apnoea can lead to:
high blood pressure
a higher chance of having a stroke
depression or changes in your mood
a higher chance of having a serious accident caused by tiredness, such as a car accident
difficulty concentrating at work or school
Sleep apnoea can also be difficult for your partner and put a strain on your relationship with them.
Important
You may need to tell the DVLA about your sleep apnoea. Sometimes you may need to stop driving until your symptoms are under control.
You can check the rules for driving if you have sleep apnoea on the GOV.UK website.
Causes of sleep apnoea
Sleep apnoea happens if your airways become too narrow while you sleep. This stops you breathing properly.
Sleep apnoea has been linked to:
obesity
having a large neck
getting older – although children and young adults can also get it
having other family members with sleep apnoea
smoking and drinking alcohol
having large tonsils or adenoids
sleeping on your back
Page last reviewed: 07 August 2019
Next review due: 07 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright