Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Living with
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the name for a group of lung conditions that cause breathing difficulties.
It includes:
emphysema – damage to the air sacs in the lungs
chronic bronchitis – long-term inflammation of the airways
COPD is a common condition that mainly affects middle-aged or older adults who smoke. Many people do not realise they have it.
The breathing problems tend to get gradually worse over time and can limit your normal activities, although treatment can help keep the condition under control.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and COPD from the British Lung Foundation
Symptoms of COPD
The main symptoms of COPD are:
increasing breathlessness, particularly when you're active
a persistent chesty cough with phlegm – some people may dismiss this as just a "smoker's cough"
frequent chest infections
persistent wheezing
Without treatment, the symptoms usually get progressively worse. There may also be periods when they get suddenly worse, known as a flare-up or exacerbation.
Find out more about the symptoms of COPD.
When to get medical advice
See a GP if you have persistent symptoms of COPD, particularly if you're over 35 and smoke or used to smoke.
Do not ignore the symptoms. If they're caused by COPD, it's best to start treatment as soon as possible, before your lungs become significantly damaged.
The GP will ask about your symptoms and whether you smoke or have smoked in the past. They can organise a breathing test to help diagnose COPD and rule out other lung conditions, such as asthma.
Find out more about how COPD is diagnosed.
Causes of COPD
COPD happens when the lungs become inflamed, damaged and narrowed. The main cause is smoking, although the condition can sometimes affect people who have never smoked.
The likelihood of developing COPD increases the more you smoke and the longer you've smoked.
Some cases of COPD are caused by long-term exposure to harmful fumes or dust. Others are the result of a rare genetic problem which means the lungs are more vulnerable to damage.
Find out more about the causes of COPD.
Treatments for COPD
The damage to the lungs caused by COPD is permanent, but treatment can help slow down the progression of the condition.
Treatments include:
stopping smoking – if you have COPD and you smoke, this is the most important thing you can do
inhalers and medicines – to help make breathing easier
pulmonary rehabilitation – a specialised programme of exercise and education
surgery or a lung transplant – although this is only an option for a very small number of people
Find out more about how COPD is treated and living with COPD.
Outlook for COPD
The outlook for COPD varies from person to person. The condition cannot be cured or reversed, but for many people, treatment can help keep it under control so it does not severely limit their daily activities.
But in some people, COPD may continue to get worse despite treatment, eventually having a significant impact on their quality of life and leading to life-threatening problems.
Information:
Social care and support guide
If you:
need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability
care for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled – including family members
The guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.
Preventing COPD
COPD is largely a preventable condition. You can significantly reduce your chances of developing it if you avoid smoking.
If you already smoke, stopping can help prevent further damage to your lungs before it starts to cause troublesome symptoms.
If you think you need help to stop smoking, you can contact NHS Smokefree for free advice and support. You may also want to talk to a GP about the stop smoking treatments available.
Find out more about stopping smoking and where to find a stop smoking service near you.
Page last reviewed: 20 September 2019
Next review due: 20 September 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright