Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Bedwetting in children
Bedwetting is common and often runs in families. It can be upsetting, but most children and young people will grow out of it. See a GP or school nurse for advice.
Things you can do at home to help with bedwetting
Do
give your child enough water to drink during the day
make sure your child goes to the toilet regularly, around 4 to 7 times a day, including just before bedtime
agree with your child on rewards for positive actions, such as a sticker for every time they use the toilet before bed
use waterproof covers on their mattress and duvet
make sure they have easy access to a toilet at night
Don’t
do not punish your child – it is not their fault and can make bedwetting worse
do not give your child drinks containing caffeine, such as cola, tea and coffee – this can make them pee more
do not regularly wake or carry your child in the night to use the toilet – this will not help in the long term
Bedwetting in young children is normal
Many children under the age of 5 wet the bed.
It can take some time for a child to learn to stay dry throughout the night.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you've tried things you can do at home and your child keeps wetting the bed
your child has started wetting the bed again after being dry for more than 6 months
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments from a GP
The GP will be able to suggest other options such as:
a bedwetting alarm
medicine to reduce how much pee your child makes at night
The GP will check if treatment is helping. They'll also be able to offer support if you are finding it hard to cope.
If these treatments do not work, your child may be referred to a specialist.
Causes of bedwetting
There are many reasons why a child might wet the bed. Causes include:
not feeling the need to pee while sleeping
making too much pee at night
stress at home or at school
Bedwetting may also be caused by an underlying health condition such as diabetes or constipation.
More information and advice on bedwetting
Bladder & Bowel UK: Resources for children and young people
ERIC: Bedwetting
Page last reviewed: 27 April 2020
Next review due: 27 April 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright