Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Monkeypox
Monkeypox is a rare disease caused by infection with the monkeypox virus.
Most cases have been in Africa. The risk of catching monkeypox in the UK is very low.
It's usually a mild illness that will get better on its own without treatment. Some people can develop more serious symptoms, so patients with monkeypox in the UK are cared for in specialist hospitals.
What is the risk of catching monkeypox in the UK?
There have only been a very small number of cases of monkeypox in the UK.
When there is a case, health professionals will aim to contact anyone who has been in close contact with the infected person.
If you have not been contacted, be reassured you are extremely unlikely to catch monkeypox.
Symptoms of monkeypox
The illness begins with:
high temperature
headache
muscle aches
backache
swollen glands
chills
exhaustion
A rash usually begins 1 to 5 days after the first symptoms appear. The spots often start on the face before spreading to other parts of the body.
During the illness the rash changes from raised red bumps, to spots filled with fluid. The spots eventually form scabs which later fall off.
How monkeypox is spread
Monkeypox does not spread easily between people, but it's possible to catch it from:
touching items like clothing, bedding or towels used by an infected person
touching monkeypox spots or scabs
a person with a monkeypox rash who coughs or sneezes near you
Diagnosis of monkeypox
It's difficult to know if the infection is monkeypox as it can often be confused with other infections such as chickenpox.
It is diagnosed after an examination by a specialist and testing.
Treating monkeypox
Treatment for monkeypox aims to relieve the symptoms and takes place in specialist hospitals.
Further information
Find more detailed information on monkeypox on GOV.UK.
Page last reviewed: 28 September 2018
Next review due: 28 September 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright