Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Stomach ache
Most stomach aches are not anything serious and will go away after a few days.
Common causes of stomach ache
These are some common types of stomach ache and what may be causing them. But see a GP if you're unsure and worried.
Type of stomach ache
Type of stomach ache Possible condition
Feeling bloated, farting a lot trapped wind
Feeling full and bloated after eating, heartburn, feeling sick indigestion
Cannot poo constipation
Watery poo, feeling sick, vomiting diarrhoea or food poisoning
You can ask a pharmacist about:
what might be causing your stomach ache
treatments that might help
medicines for constipation and indigestion
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the pain gets much worse quickly
the pain or bloating will not go away or keeps coming back
you have stomach pain and problems with swallowing food
you're losing weight without trying to
you suddenly pee more often or less often
peeing is suddenly painful
you bleed from your bottom or vagina, or have abnormal discharge from your vagina
your diarrhoea does not go away after a few days
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
your stomach ache came on very suddenly or is severe
it hurts when you touch your stomach
you're vomiting blood or your vomit looks like ground coffee
your poo is bloody or black and sticky and extremely smelly
you cannot pee
you cannot poo or fart
you cannot breathe
you have chest pain
you're diabetic and vomiting
someone has collapsed
Other causes of stomach ache
Do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Type of stomach ache
Type of stomach ache Possible condition
Pain and cramps when you have your period period pain
Sudden pain in the lower right-hand side appendicitis
Ongoing cramps, bloating, diarrhoea, constipation irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Bad ongoing pain that can go down to your groin, nausea, pain when peeing kidney stones
Severe pain that lasts for hours in the centre of your tummy or just under the ribs on the right-hand side gallstones
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 15 July 2020
Next review due: 15 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright