Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Leg cramps
Leg cramps are common, usually harmless and only last a short time. They can happen at any time, but most people have them at night or when resting.
Check if it's leg cramps
Leg cramps happen when a muscle in the leg shortens and causes a sudden pain that can make it hard to move.
The cramps can last from a few seconds to 10 minutes.
They can affect the:
calf muscle, below the knee at the back of the leg
muscles in the feet or the thighs (less often)
After the cramp has stopped, the muscle might feel sore for up to 24 hours.
Things you can do about leg cramps yourself
During a cramp
Stretching and massaging the muscle may ease the pain during a cramp, although most cramps go away without you doing anything.
Paracetamol or ibuprofen can help to ease muscle soreness after a cramp, but they will not help when it's happening as they take too long to work.
Preventing cramps
Regular calf-stretching exercises may help to reduce cramps but may not completely stop them from happening.
How to stretch calf muscles
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
leg cramps are disturbing your sleep
you also have numbness or swelling in your legs
cramps last longer than 10 minutes
you have any other symptoms or concerns
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for leg cramps from a GP
A GP will examine you to try to find out the reason for your leg cramps.
They will suggest a treatment depending on the cause.
This might be:
stretching exercises
quinine tablets if exercise has not helped
Quinine is not suitable for everyone. The GP will discuss potential risks and side effects with you.
Causes of leg cramps
Leg cramps can sometimes be caused by:
ageing
putting too much strain on muscles during exercise, which can be worse in hot or humid weather
pregnancy (usually in the later stage)
certain medicines, for example medicine for lowering cholesterol (statins) or high blood pressure (diuretics)
not drinking enough fluids (dehydration)
liver disease because of too much alcohol
The reason for some cramps is unknown.
Page last reviewed: 16 December 2020
Next review due: 16 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright