Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Flat feet
Flat feet, or "fallen arches", are where your feet press flat on the ground. They're common and usually nothing to worry about.
Check if you have flat feet
To see if you have flat feet, check the inner sides of your feet while you're standing up.
If you have flat feet, your feet will be flat on the ground.
Credit:
You do not have flat feet if the inside part of your foot is raised off the ground (this is called the arch).
Credit:
Flat feet do not usually need to be treated
You do not need to do anything if you or your child have flat feet and they're not causing any problems.
Most children have flat feet until they're about 6 years of age. After this time, they usually develop an arch.
Flat feet:
do not usually cause any problems
should not stop you doing any activities, including sports
are rarely a sign of anything serious
But sometimes, you may have pain around your ankle or the arch of your foot may ache. Your shoes may also wear out quickly.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have flat feet and:
your feet are painful, stiff, weak or numb
you often get feet or ankle injuries
you have problems with walking or balance
you did not have flat feet before
it only affects 1 foot
These problems mean you might need treatment.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments for flat feet
If flat feet are causing problems and you need treatment, a GP may refer you to a specialist like a podiatrist or physiotherapist.
Referral to a specialist is not available everywhere and waiting times can be long.
Your GP might be able to give you advice about paying to see a specialist privately.
A foot specialist can offer advice about:
what shoes to wear (wide, comfortable shoes with a low heel are usually best)
shoe insoles to support your feet
foot stretches and exercises
painkillers
These will not change the shape of your feet, but can help with things like pain or stiffness.
Surgery for flat feet
Surgery is rarely needed for flat feet.
It might help if there's a problem with the bones, tissues or muscles in your feet and other treatments have not worked.
Your GP may refer you to a surgeon if they think surgery might help.
Causes of flat feet
There's often no obvious cause for flat feet. It might just be the way your feet are.
Sometimes flat feet run in families.
Rarely, flat feet may be caused by:
the bones in the feet not growing properly in the womb
stretching of the tissues in your feet (possibly as a result of things like an injury, getting older or being overweight)
conditions affecting the muscles, nerves or joints in the whole body like cerebral palsy and spina bifida
Page last reviewed: 24 January 2022
Next review due: 24 January 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright