Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Bronchiolitis
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Prevention
Bronchiolitis is a common lower respiratory tract infection that affects babies and young children under 2 years old.
Most cases are mild and clear up within 2 to 3 weeks without the need for treatment, although some children have severe symptoms and need hospital treatment.
The early symptoms of bronchiolitis are similar to those of a common cold, such as a runny nose and a cough.
Further symptoms then usually develop over the next few days, including:
a slight high temperature (fever)
a dry and persistent cough
difficulty feeding
rapid or noisy breathing (wheezing)
When to get medical help
Most cases of bronchiolitis are not serious, but see your GP or call NHS 111 if:
you're worried about your child
your child has taken less than half their usual amount during the last 2 or 3 feeds, or they have had a dry nappy for 12 hours or more
your child has a persistent high temperature of 38C or above
your child seems very tired or irritable
A diagnosis of bronchiolitis is based on your child's symptoms and an examination of their breathing.
Dial 999 for an ambulance if:
your baby is having difficulty breathing
your baby's tongue or lips are blue
there are long pauses in your baby's breathing
What causes bronchiolitis?
Bronchiolitis is caused by a virus known as the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), which is spread through tiny droplets of liquid from the coughs or sneezes of someone who's infected.
The infection causes the smallest airways in the lungs (the bronchioles) to become infected and inflamed.
The inflammation reduces the amount of air entering the lungs, making it difficult to breathe.
Who's affected?
Around 1 in 3 children in the UK will develop bronchiolitis during their first year of life. It most commonly affects babies between 3 and 6 months of age.
By the age of 2, almost all infants will have been infected with RSV and up to half will have had bronchiolitis.
Bronchiolitis is most widespread during the winter (from November to March). It's possible to get bronchiolitis more than once during the same season.
Treating bronchiolitis
There's no medication to kill the virus that causes bronchiolitis, but the infection usually clears up within 2 weeks without the need for treatment.
Most children can be cared for at home in the same way that you'd treat a cold.
Make sure your child gets enough fluid to avoid dehydration. You can give infants paracetamol or ibuprofen to bring down their temperature if the fever is upsetting them. 
About 2 to 3% of babies who develop bronchiolitis during the first year of life will need to be admitted to hospital because they develop more serious symptoms, such as breathing difficulties.
This is more common in premature babies (born before week 37 of pregnancy) and those born with a heart or lung condition.
Preventing bronchiolitis
It's very difficult to prevent bronchiolitis, but there are steps you can take to reduce your child's risk of catching it and help prevent the virus spreading.
You should:
wash your hands and your child's hands frequently
wash or wipe toys and surfaces regularly
keep infected children at home until their symptoms have improved
keep newborn babies away from people with colds or flu
avoid smoking around your child, and do not let others smoke around them
Some children who are at high risk of developing severe bronchiolitis may have monthly antibody injections, which help limit the severity of the infection.
Page last reviewed: 06 August 2018
Next review due: 06 August 2021
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright