Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Weight loss surgery
Contents
Overview
Availability
Types
Afterwards
Risks
Weight loss surgery, also called bariatric or metabolic surgery, is sometimes used as a treatment for people who are very obese.
It can lead to significant weight loss and help improve many obesity-related conditions, such as type 2 diabetes or high blood pressure.
But it's a major operation and in most cases should only be considered after trying to lose weight through a healthy diet and exercise.
NHS weight loss surgery
Weight loss surgery is available on the NHS if:
you have a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or more, or a BMI between 35 and 40 and an obesity-related condition that might improve if you lost weight (such as type 2 diabetes or high blood pressure)
you've tried all other weight loss methods, such as dieting and exercise, but have struggled to lose weight or keep it off
you agree to long-term follow-up after surgery – such as making healthy lifestyle changes and attending regular check-ups
Speak to a GP if you think weight loss surgery may be an option for you. If you qualify for NHS treatment, they can refer you for an assessment to check surgery is suitable.
You can also pay for surgery privately, although this can be expensive.
Read more about NHS and private weight loss surgery.
Types of weight loss surgery
There are several types of weight loss surgery.
The most common types are:
gastric band – a band is placed around your stomach, so you do not need to eat as much to feel full
gastric bypass – the top part of your stomach is joined to the small intestine, so you feel fuller sooner and do not absorb as many calories from food
sleeve gastrectomy – some of your stomach is removed, so you cannot eat as much as you could before and you'll feel full sooner
All these operations can lead to significant weight loss within a few years, but each has advantages and disadvantages.
If you're considering weight loss surgery, speak to a surgeon about the different types available to help decide which is best for you.
Read more about the types of weight loss surgery.
Life after weight loss surgery
Weight loss surgery can achieve dramatic weight loss, but it's not a cure for obesity on its own.
You'll need to commit to making permanent lifestyle changes after surgery to avoid putting weight back on.
You'll need to:
change your diet – you'll be on a liquid or soft food diet in the weeks after surgery, but will gradually move onto a normal balanced diet that you need to stay on for life
exercise regularly – once you've recovered from surgery, you'll be advised to start an exercise plan and continue it for life
attend regular follow-up appointments to check how things are going after surgery and get advice or support if you need it
Women who have weight loss surgery will also usually need to avoid becoming pregnant during the first 12 to 18 months after surgery.
Read more about life after weight loss surgery.
Risks of weight loss surgery
Weight loss surgery carries a small risk of complications.
These include:
being left with excess folds of skin – you may need further surgery to remove these and it is not usually available free of charge on the NHS
not getting enough vitamins and minerals from your diet – you'll probably need to take supplements for the rest of your life after surgery
gallstones (small, hard stones that form in the gallbladder)
a blood clot in the leg (deep vein thrombosis) or lungs (pulmonary embolism)
the gastric band slipping out of place, food leaking from the join between the stomach and small intestine, or the gut becoming blocked or narrowed
Before having surgery, speak to your surgeon about the possible benefits and risks of the procedure.
Read more about the risks of weight loss surgery.
Page last reviewed: 14 April 2020
Next review due: 14 April 2023
Next
:
Availability
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright