Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Pulmonary hypertension
Contents
Overview
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Pulmonary hypertension is high blood pressure in the blood vessels that supply the lungs (pulmonary arteries).
It's a serious condition that can damage the right side of the heart.
The walls of the pulmonary arteries become thick and stiff, and cannot expand as well to allow blood through.
The reduced blood flow makes it harder for the right side of the heart to pump blood through the arteries.
If the right side of your heart has to continually work harder, it can gradually become weaker. This can lead to heart failure.
Pulmonary hypertension is a rare condition that can affect people of all ages, but it's more common in people who have another heart or lung condition.
Symptoms of pulmonary hypertension
Symptoms of pulmonary hypertension include:
shortness of breath
tiredness
feeling faint or dizzy
chest pain (angina)
a racing heartbeat (palpitations)
swelling (oedema) in the legs, ankles, feet or tummy (abdomen)
The symptoms often get worse during exercise, which can limit your ability to take part in physical activities.
If you have a type of pulmonary hypertension known as pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), you may not have any symptoms until the condition is quite advanced.
When to see a GP
See a GP if you have any symptoms of pulmonary hypertension. They may ask you about your symptoms and medical history, and they may carry out a physical examination.
Correctly diagnosing pulmonary hypertension can sometimes take time because its symptoms are similar to those of many other heart and lung conditions.
Tests you may have include a type of heart scan called an echocardiogram, and right heart catheterisation, where a thin, flexible tube is inserted into your pulmonary artery.
Read more about how pulmonary hypertension is diagnosed.
Causes of pulmonary hypertension
The changes in the pulmonary arteries that lead to pulmonary hypertension can be caused by:
problems with the smaller branches of the pulmonary arteries (PAH)
conditions that affect the left side of the heart
lung diseases or a shortage of oxygen in the body (hypoxia)
blood clots that cause narrowing or a blockage in the pulmonary arteries
Read more about the causes of pulmonary hypertension.
Treating pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension cannot be cured, but treatment can reduce the symptoms and help you manage your condition. 
Pulmonary hypertension usually gets worse over time. Left untreated, it may cause heart failure, which can be fatal, so it's important treatment is started as soon as possible.
If another condition is causing pulmonary hypertension, the underlying condition should be treated first. This can sometimes prevent the pulmonary arteries being permanently damaged.
Treatments for pulmonary hypertension may include anticoagulant medicines to reduce the blood's ability to thicken (clot) and diuretics to remove excess fluid as a result of heart failure.
You may also be offered medicine to widen the blood vessels.
Home oxygen treatment may also be prescribed if the level of oxygen in your blood is low.
Read more about treating pulmonary hypertension.
Outlook
The outlook for pulmonary hypertension varies, depending on factors such as:
what's causing it
how quickly it's diagnosed
how advanced your symptoms are
whether you have another underlying health condition
The specialist in charge of your care will be able to give you more detailed information.
Having pulmonary hypertension can affect your ability to carry out everyday activities.
The charity Pulmonary Hypertension Association UK offers practical information and support for people living with pulmonary hypertension and their friends and families.
Page last reviewed: 23 January 2020
Next review due: 23 January 2023
Next
:
Causes
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright