Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Earache
Earache and ear pain is common, particularly in young children. It can be painful, but is not usually a sign of anything serious.
How long earache lasts
It depends on what's causing it. Most earaches in children are caused by an ear infection, which usually start to improve after a few days.
Spotting earache in babies and young children
A young child might have earache if they:
rub or pull their ear
do not react to some sounds
have a temperature of 38C or above
are irritable or restless
are off their food
keep losing their balance
Earache and ear pain can affect 1 or both ears.
How to treat earache yourself
There are some things you can do to help relieve earache and ear pain.
Do
use painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen (children under 16 should not take aspirin)
place a warm or cold flannel on the ear
Don’t
do not put anything inside your ear, such as cotton buds
do not try to remove earwax
do not let water get inside your ear
A pharmacist can help with earaches
A pharmacist might be able to tell you:
what you can do to treat earache yourself
if you can buy anything to help (for example, eardrops)
if you need to see a GP
Find your nearest pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you or your child:
have earache for more than 3 days
keep getting earache
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Get an urgent GP appointment if:
You or your child have earache and:
become generally unwell
a very high temperature or feel hot and shivery
swelling around the ear
fluid coming from the ear
hearing loss or a change in hearing
something stuck in the ear
your child is under 2 and has earache in both ears
Call 111 for advice if you cannot get an urgent appointment.
What causes earache and pain
Earache and pain can be caused by many things, but sometimes it's not known by what.
Here are some of the most common causes:
A table showing possible causes of earache symptoms.
Symptoms Possible condition
Ear pain with toothache Children teething, dental abscess
Ear pain with change in hearing Glue ear, earwax build-up, an object stuck in the ear (do not try to remove it yourself – see a GP), perforated eardrum (particularly after a loud noise or accident)
Ear pain with pain when swallowing Sore throat, tonsillitis, quinsy (a complication of tonsillitis)
Ear pain with a fever Ear infection, flu, cold
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 06 August 2019
Next review due: 06 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright