Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Smelly feet
Smelly feet (bromodosis) are common and often caused by a build-up of sweat and bacteria. You can usually treat them yourself.
How to treat and prevent smelly feet yourself
Always keep your feet clean and dry, including between your toes.
Do
wash your feet at least once a day (use an antibacterial soap if you can)
remove hard skin with a foot file and keep toenails short and clean
use foot powder or an antiperspirant
wear breathable or natural fabrics on your feet, like cotton or leather
let shoes dry out before wearing them again
Don’t
do not wear the same socks or shoes 2 days in a row
do not wear tight shoes
do not walk around barefoot in public or communal places that are wet, like swimming pools and showers in gyms
A pharmacist can help with smelly feet
You can ask a pharmacist about:
antibacterial soaps, powders, and creams
special foot deodorant
medicated insoles for your shoes
antibacterial socks
Find a pharmacy
Causes of smelly feet
The main causes of smelly feet are a build-up of sweat and bacteria on them and fungal infections like athlete's foot.
The amount you sweat can be affected by:
hot weather
exercise
standing all day
being overweight
hormonal changes, which happen during puberty, menopause and pregnancy
some medicines, such as antidepressants
a condition that causes excessive sweating called hyperhidrosis
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your smelly feet have not got better after treating them yourself
your smelly feet are affecting your daily life
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Medical teatments for smelly feet
Treatment for smelly feet depends on the cause.
If your smelly feet are caused by a fungal infection, a GP might prescribe a stronger antifungal treatment to clear it up.
If the cause is sweating, they might suggest a stronger antiperspirant or treatment to reduce sweating.
A treatment called iontophoresis may help with sweating, which involves passing a weak electrical current through the affected areas.
A GP might also suggest you see a foot specialist (podiatrist) if your footcare problems do not clear up quickly.
Find a podiatrist
Page last reviewed: 01 February 2022
Next review due: 01 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright