Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Iron deficiency anaemia
Iron deficiency anaemia is caused by lack of iron, often because of blood loss or pregnancy. It's treated with iron tablets prescribed by a GP and by eating iron-rich foods.
Check if you have iron deficiency anaemia
Symptoms can include:
tiredness and lack of energy
shortness of breath
noticeable heartbeats (heart palpitations)
pale skin
Less common symptoms of iron deficiency anaemia
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have symptoms of iron deficiency anaemia
A simple blood test will confirm if you're anaemic.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will ask you about your lifestyle and medical history.
If the reason for the anaemia is not clear, they might order some tests to find out what might be causing the symptoms.
They might also refer you to a specialist for further checks.
Blood tests for iron deficiency anaemia
The GP will usually order a full blood count (FBC) test. This will find out if the number of red blood cells you have (your red blood cell count) is normal.
You do not need to do anything to prepare for this test.
Iron deficiency anaemia is the most common type of anaemia. There are other types, like vitamin B12 and folate anaemia, that the blood test will also check for.
Treatment for iron deficiency anaemia
Once the reason you have anaemia has been found (for example, an ulcer or heavy periods) the GP will recommend treatment.
If the blood test shows your red blood cell count is low, you'll be prescribed iron tablets to replace the iron that's missing from your body.
The prescribed tablets are stronger than the supplements you can buy in pharmacies and supermarkets.
You’ll need to take them for about 6 months. Drinking orange juice after you've taken a tablet may help your body absorb the iron.
Follow the GP’s advice about how to take iron tablets.
Some people get side effects when taking iron tablets like:
constipation or diarrhoea
tummy pain
heartburn
feeling sick
black poo
Try taking the tablets with or soon after food to reduce the chance of side effects.
It's important to keep taking the tablets, even if you get side effects.
Your GP may carry out repeat blood tests over the next few months to check that your iron level is getting back to normal.
Important
Keep iron supplement tablets out of the reach of children. An overdose of iron in a young child can be fatal.
Things you can do yourself
If your diet is partly causing your iron deficiency anaemia, your GP will tell you what foods are rich in iron so you can eat more of them.
Eat and drink more:
dark-green leafy vegetables like watercress and curly kale
cereals and bread with extra iron in them (fortified)
meat
dried fruit like apricots, prunes and raisins
pulses (beans, peas and lentils)
Eat and drink less:
tea
coffee
milk and dairy
foods with high levels of phytic acid, such as wholegrain cereals, which can stop your body absorbing iron from other foods and pills
Large amounts of these foods and drinks make it harder for your body to absorb iron.
You might be referred to a specialist dietitian if you're finding it hard to include iron in your diet.
Causes of iron deficiency anaemia
In pregnancy, iron deficiency anaemia is most often caused by a lack of iron in your diet.
Heavy periods and pregnancy are very common causes of iron deficiency anaemia. Heavy periods can be treated with medicine.
For men and for women whose periods have stopped, bleeding in the stomach and intestines is the most common cause of iron deficiency anaemia. This can be caused by:
taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen and aspirin
stomach ulcers
inflammation of the bowel or food pipe (oesophagus)
piles
cancers of the bowel or stomach – but this is less common
Any other conditions or actions that cause blood loss could also lead to iron deficiency anaemia.
If iron deficiency anaemia is not treated
Untreated iron deficiency anaemia:
can make you more at risk of illness and infection – a lack of iron affects the immune system
may increase your risk of developing complications that affect the heart or lungs – such as an abnormally fast heartbeat (tachycardia) or heart failure
in pregnancy, can cause a greater risk of complications before and after birth
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 29 January 2021
Next review due: 29 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright