Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Stomach ulcer
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Stomach ulcers, also known as gastric ulcers, are sores that develop on the lining of the stomach.
You can also get ulcers in part of the intestine just beyond the stomach, which are called duodenal ulcers.
Stomach ulcers and duodenal ulcers (sometimes called peptic ulcers) cause the same symptoms and treatment for both is the same.
Signs and symptoms
The most common symptom of a stomach ulcer is a burning or gnawing pain in the centre of the tummy (abdomen).
But stomach ulcers aren't always painful and some people may experience other symptoms, such as indigestion, heartburn and acid reflux and feeling sick.
When to seek medical advice
You should visit your GP if you think you may have a stomach ulcer.
Contact your GP or NHS 111 immediately if:
you are passing dark, sticky, tar-like stools
you have a sudden, sharp pain in your tummy that gets steadily worse
Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 if:
you are vomiting blood – the blood can appear bright red or have a dark brown, grainy appearance, similar to coffee grounds
These could be a sign of a serious complication, such as internal bleeding.
Causes of stomach ulcers
Stomach ulcers happen when there’s damage to the layer that protects the stomach lining from the acids in your stomach.
This is usually a result of:
an infection with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) bacteria
taking anti-inflammatory medicines (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen or aspirin – particularly if they're taken for a long time or at high doses
It used to be thought that stress or certain foods might cause stomach ulcers, but there's little evidence to suggest this is the case.
Stomach ulcers can affect anyone but are more common in people aged 60 or over. Men are more affected than women.
How stomach ulcers are treated
Treatment will depend on what caused the ulcer.
Most people will be prescribed a medication called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) to reduce the amount of acid in their stomach.
You’ll also need antibiotics if your ulcers were caused by a H. pylori infection.
Stomach ulcers can come back after treatment, although this is less likely to happen if the underlying cause is addressed.
Possible complications
Complications of stomach ulcers are relatively uncommon, but they can be very serious and potentially life threatening.
The main complications include:
bleeding at the site of the ulcer
the stomach lining at the site of the ulcer splitting open (perforation)
the ulcer blocking the movement of food through the digestive system (gastric obstruction)
Read more about the complications of stomach ulcers.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 14 January 2022
Next review due: 14 January 2025
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright