Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Tuberculosis (TB)
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial infection spread through inhaling tiny droplets from the coughs or sneezes of an infected person.
It mainly affects the lungs, but it can affect any part of the body, including the tummy (abdomen), glands, bones and nervous system.
TB is a potentially serious condition, but it can be cured if it's treated with the right antibiotics.
Symptoms of TB
Typical symptoms of TB include:
a persistent cough that lasts more than 3 weeks and usually brings up phlegm, which may be bloody
weight loss
night sweats
high temperature
tiredness and fatigue
loss of appetite
swellings in the neck
You should see a GP if you have a cough that lasts more than 3 weeks or you cough up blood.
Read more about the symptoms of TB and diagnosing TB.
What causes TB?
TB is a bacterial infection. TB that affects the lungs (pulmonary TB) is the most contagious type, but it usually only spreads after prolonged exposure to someone with the illness. 
In most healthy people, the body's natural defence against infection and illness (the immune system) kills the bacteria and there are no symptoms.
Sometimes the immune system cannot kill the bacteria, but manages to prevent it spreading in the body.
You will not have any symptoms, but the bacteria will remain in your body. This is known as latent TB. People with latent TB are not infectious to others.
If the immune system fails to kill or contain the infection, it can spread within the lungs or other parts of the body and symptoms will develop within a few weeks or months. This is known as active TB.
Latent TB could develop into an active TB disease at a later date, particularly if your immune system becomes weakened.
Read more about the causes of TB
Treating TB
With treatment, TB can almost always be cured. A course of antibiotics will usually need to be taken for 6 months.
Several different antibiotics are used because some forms of TB are resistant to certain antibiotics.
If you're infected with a drug-resistant form of TB, treatment with 6 or more different medications may be needed.
If you're diagnosed with pulmonary TB, you'll be contagious for about 2 to 3 weeks into your course of treatment.
You will not usually need to be isolated during this time, but it's important to take some basic precautions to stop the infection spreading to your family and friends.
You should:
stay away from work, school or college until your TB treatment team advises you it's safe to return
always cover your mouth when coughing, sneezing or laughing
carefully dispose of any used tissues in a sealed plastic bag
open windows when possible to ensure a good supply of fresh air in the areas where you spend time
avoid sleeping in the same room as other people 
If you're in close contact with someone who has TB, you may have tests to see whether you're also infected. These can include a chest X-ray, blood tests, and a skin test called the Mantoux test.
Read more about treating TB
Vaccination for TB
The BCG vaccine offers protection against TB, and is recommended on the NHS for babies, children and adults under the age of 35 who are considered to be at risk of catching TB.
The BCG vaccine is not routinely given to anyone over the age of 35 as there's no evidence that it works for people in this age group.
At-risk groups include:
children living in areas with high rates of TB
people with close family members from countries with high TB rates
people going to live and work with local people for more than 3 months in an area with high rates of TB
If you're a healthcare worker or NHS employee and you come into contact with patients or clinical specimens, you should also have a TB vaccination, irrespective of age, if:
you have not been previously vaccinated (you do not have a BCG scar or the relevant documentation), and
the results of a Mantoux skin test or a TB interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) blood test are negative
Read more about who should have the BCG vaccine
Countries with high TB rates
Parts of the world with high rates of TB include:
Africa – particularly sub-Saharan Africa (all the African countries south of the Sahara desert) and west Africa
south Asia – including India, Pakistan, Indonesia and Bangladesh
Russia
China
South America
the western Pacific region (to the west of the Pacific Ocean) – including Vietnam, Cambodia and the Philippines 
GOV.UK has detailed information on each country's TB rates
Page last reviewed: 12 November 2019
Next review due: 12 November 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright