Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Pneumonia
Contents
Overview
Treatment
Pneumonia is swelling (inflammation) of the tissue in one or both lungs. It's usually caused by a bacterial infection. It can also be caused by a virus, such as coronavirus (COVID-19).
Symptoms of pneumonia
The symptoms of pneumonia can develop suddenly over 24 to 48 hours, or they may come on more slowly over several days.
Common symptoms of pneumonia include:
a cough – which may be dry, or produce thick yellow, green, brown or blood-stained mucus (phlegm)
difficulty breathing – your breathing may be rapid and shallow, and you may feel breathless, even when resting
rapid heartbeat
high temperature
feeling generally unwell
sweating and shivering
loss of appetite
chest pain – which gets worse when breathing or coughing
Less common symptoms include:
coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
headaches
fatigue
feeling sick or being sick
wheezing
joint and muscle pain
feeling confused and disorientated, particularly in elderly people
Important:
Could it be coronavirus (COVID-19)?
If you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, it could be COVID-19.
Get advice about symptoms of COVID-19 and what to do
When to get medical help
If you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell, use the 111 online coronavirus service.
If you feel unwell and have any other symptoms of pneumonia, contact your GP or use the regular 111 online service.
Only call 111 if you cannot get help online or you need help for a child under 5.
Call 999 for an ambulance if you or someone you care for:
are struggling to breathe
are coughing up blood
have blue lips or a blue face
feel cold and sweaty, with pale or blotchy skin
have a rash that does not fade when you roll a glass over it
collapse or faint
become confused or very drowsy
have stopped peeing or are peeing much less than usual
Who's affected
Pneumonia can affect people of any age, but it's more common, and can be more serious, in certain groups of people, such as the very young or the elderly.
People in these groups are more likely to need hospital treatment if they develop pneumonia.
What causes pneumonia
Pneumonia is usually the result of a bacterial infection.
As well as bacterial pneumonia, other types include:
viral pneumonia – caused by a virus, such as coronavirus
aspiration pneumonia – caused by breathing in vomit, a foreign object, such as a peanut, or a harmful substance, such as smoke or a chemical
fungal pneumonia – rare in the UK and more likely to affect people with a weakened immune system
hospital-acquired pneumonia – pneumonia that develops in hospital while being treated for another condition or having an operation; people in intensive care on breathing machines are particularly at risk of developing ventilator-associated pneumonia
Risk groups
The following groups have an increased risk of developing pneumonia:
babies and very young children
elderly people
people who smoke
people with other health conditions, such as asthma, cystic fibrosis, or a heart, kidney or liver condition
people with a weakened immune system – for example, as a result of a recent illness, such as flu, having HIV or AIDS, having chemotherapy, or taking medicine after an organ transplant
Diagnosing pneumonia
A doctor may be able to diagnose pneumonia by asking about your symptoms and examining your chest.
Further tests may be needed in some cases.
Pneumonia can be difficult to diagnose because it shares many symptoms with other conditions, such as the common cold, bronchitis and asthma.
To help make a diagnosis, a doctor may ask you:
whether you feel breathless or you're breathing faster than usual
how long you have had your cough, and whether you're coughing up mucus and what colour it is
if the pain in your chest is worse when you breathe in or out
A doctor may also take your temperature and listen to your chest and back with a stethoscope to check for any crackling or rattling sounds.
They may also listen to your chest by tapping it. Lungs filled with fluid produce a different sound from normal healthy lungs.
If you have mild pneumonia, you probably will not need to have a chest X-ray or any other tests.
You may need a chest X-ray or other tests, such as a sputum (mucus) test or blood tests, if your symptoms have not improved within 48 hours of starting treatment.
Treating pneumonia
Mild pneumonia can usually be treated at home by:
getting plenty of rest
taking antibiotics if the pneumonia is likely to be caused by a bacterial infection
drinking plenty of fluids
If you do not have any other health problems, you should respond well to treatment and soon recover, although your cough may last for some time.
For at-risk groups, pneumonia can be severe and may need to be treated in hospital.
This is because it can lead to serious complications, which in some cases can be fatal, depending on a person's health and age.
Complications of pneumonia
Complications of pneumonia are more common in young children, the elderly and those with pre-existing health conditions, such as diabetes.
Possible complications of pneumonia include:
pleurisy – where the thin linings between your lungs and ribcage (pleura) become inflamed, which can lead to respiratory failure
a lung abscess – a rare complication that's mostly seen in people with a serious pre-existing illness or a history of severe alcohol misuse
blood poisoning (sepsis) – also a rare but serious complication
You'll be admitted to hospital for treatment if you develop one of these complications.
Preventing pneumonia
Although most cases of pneumonia are bacterial and are not passed on from one person to another, ensuring good standards of hygiene will help prevent germs spreading.
For example, you should:
cover your mouth and nose with a handkerchief or tissue when you cough or sneeze
throw away used tissues immediately – germs can live for several hours after they leave your nose or mouth
wash your hands regularly to avoid transferring germs to other people or objects
A healthy lifestyle can also help prevent pneumonia. For example, you should stop smoking as it damages your lungs and increases the chance of infection.
Excessive and prolonged alcohol misuse also weakens your lungs' natural defences against infections, making you more vulnerable to pneumonia.
People at high risk of pneumonia should be offered the pneumococcal vaccine and flu vaccine.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 30 June 2019
Next review due: 30 June 2022
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright