Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Clostridium difficile (C. diff) infection
Clostridium difficile (C. diff) is a type of bacteria that can cause diarrhoea. It often affects people who have been taking antibiotics. It can usually be treated with a different type of antibiotic.
Check if you have a C. diff infection
Common symptoms of a C. diff infection include:
diarrhoea
a high temperature
loss of appetite
feeling sick
a stomach ache
How you get a C. diff infection
C. diff bacteria usually live harmlessly in your bowel along with lots of other types of bacteria.
But sometimes when you take antibiotics, the balance of bacteria in your bowel can change, causing an infection.
When someone has a C. diff infection, it can spread to other people very easily if the bacteria found in the person’s poo get onto objects and surfaces.
Who's at risk
You're more likely to get a C. diff infection if:
you're over 65 years
you're taking, or have recently taken, antibiotics
you're staying in hospital or a care home for a long time
you have a weakened immune system – for example, from having a long-term condition like diabetes or kidney failure, or treatment like chemotherapy
you're taking a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), such as omeprazole, or other medicines that reduce stomach acid
you've had a C. diff infection in the past
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have diarrhoea and you're taking, or have recently taken, antibiotics
you have bloody diarrhoea or bleeding from the bottom
you have diarrhoea for more than 7 days
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Treatments for a C. diff infection
If a doctor thinks you have a C. diff infection, they may ask for a sample of your poo to be tested.
The infection can sometimes be treated at home, or you might need to go into hospital. This is because C. diff infections can sometimes lead to more serious problems like sepsis.
A C. diff infection is treated by:
stopping any antibiotics you're taking, if possible
taking a 10-day course of another antibiotic that can treat the C. diff infection
You'll also be given advice about how to avoid dehydration, such as making sure you drink plenty of water.
Your symptoms should improve a few days after starting the new course of antibiotics. But it may be 1 to 2 weeks before the infection clears up completely.
Go back to see the GP if your symptoms get worse, you feel very unwell after starting the antibiotics, or your symptoms come back afterwards.
If your symptoms return, treatment may need to be repeated.
Important
Carry on taking your antibiotics until you've finished all your tablets, capsules or liquid, even if you feel better. If you stop your treatment early, your symptoms could come back.
How to prevent spreading a C. diff infection
C. diff infections can spread very easily. There are some things you can do to reduce the risk of passing it on to others.
Do
stay at home until at least 48 hours after your diarrhoea stops
wash your hands regularly using soap and water
clean the toilet and area around it with disinfectant after each use
wash clothes and sheets with poo on separately from other washing at the highest possible temperature
Don’t
do not share towels and flannels
do not take medicine to stop diarrhoea like loperamide because it can prevent the infection being cleared from your body
Page last reviewed: 08 February 2022
Next review due: 08 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright