Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Pompholyx (dyshidrotic eczema)
Pompholyx (also called dyshidrotic eczema) is a type of eczema that affects the hands or feet. It's usually a long-term condition, but treatment can help control the symptoms.
Check if you have pompholyx
Pompholyx causes itchy blisters on the hands or feet that come and go. The symptoms usually last 2 to 3 weeks at a time.
The first symptom is often a burning or prickling feeling in the affected area.
Fluid-filled blisters then appear on the skin. These are usually very itchy and may leak fluid.
Credit:
When the blisters go away, the skin may be dry, cracked and sore. Sometimes it might bleed.
Pompholyx most often affects the fingers and palms.
Credit:
It can also affect the toes and soles of the feet.
Credit:
If you're not sure it's pompholyx
Other conditions can cause sore, itchy patches or blisters on the hands and feet, including hand, foot and mouth disease, psoriasis or athlete's foot.
Do not try to diagnose yourself – see a GP if you're worried.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you think you have pompholyx
you have pompholyx and the blisters are very painful, leak yellow or green pus or are covered in a yellow-brown crust – these are signs of an infection
you have any other changes to your skin you're worried about
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments for pompholyx
Pompholyx is usually a long-term condition that comes and goes over time. Treatment can help control the symptoms.
The main treatments for pompholyx are:
moisturisers (emollients) – used every day to stop the skin becoming dry
steroid creams and ointments (topical steroids) – used for a few weeks at a time to reduce irritation and soreness
If the blisters leak fluid, a GP may suggest soaking your skin in potassium permanganate solution. This helps dry the blisters and reduces the risk of them getting infected.
If the blisters become infected, a GP may prescribe antibiotics.
Treatments from a specialist
If your symptoms are severe or treatment is not helping, a GP may refer you to a skin specialist (dermatologist).
A dermatologist may recommend other treatments, such as:
steroid tablets
treatment with ultraviolet (UV) light
other medicines, such as alitretinoin
Things you can do to ease symptoms of pompholyx
If you have pompholyx, your skin may get irritated easily. There are some things you can try to see if they help.
Do
wash your hands with warm (not hot or cold) water and use a moisturiser (emollient) soap substitute instead of regular soap
wear protective gloves (ideally with a cotton lining) when using chemicals like shampoos, cleansers and detergents
wear socks, tights or stockings made from cotton or silk, rather than nylon
wear shoes made from leather, rather than plastic or rubber
avoid anything you think causes your symptoms, such as cleansers or detergents
Don’t
do not burst your blisters
A pharmacist can help with pompholyx
If your skin gets very itchy and it affects your sleep, ask a pharmacist about antihistamines that make you drowsy (sedating antihistamines).
If you take these before going to bed, they can help you get to sleep.
Find a pharmacy
What causes pompholyx
It's not clear exactly what causes pompholyx.
Certain things are thought to cause symptoms in some people, including:
contact with strong chemicals like soaps, cleansers and detergents
an allergy or sensitivity to certain metals, such as nickel or cobalt
getting your hands wet regularly – for example, if you’re a hairdresser
stress
heat and sweat
Information:
If you notice something causes your symptoms, avoiding it as much as possible may help keep your symptoms under control.
Page last reviewed: 02 March 2022
Next review due: 02 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright