Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Nipple discharge
Nipple discharge is not usually a sign of anything serious, but sometimes it's a good idea to get it checked just in case.
Nipple discharge is often normal
Lots of women have nipple discharge from time to time. It may just be normal for you.
It's also not unusual for babies (boys and girls) to have milky nipple discharge soon after they're born. This should stop in a few weeks.
Nipple discharge in men is not normal.
The colour of your discharge is not a good way of telling if it's anything serious. Normal discharge can be lots of colours.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have nipple discharge and any of these:
it happens regularly and is not just a one-off
it only comes from 1 breast
it's bloodstained or smelly
you're not breastfeeding and it leaks out without any pressure on your breast
you're over 50
you have other symptoms – such as a lump, pain, redness or swelling in your breast
you're a man
It's probably nothing serious. But there's a small chance it could be cancer, so it's best to get checked.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
The GP will look at and examine your breasts.
They may refer you to a hospital or breast clinic for further tests. These will usually show that you do not have cancer.
What happens at the breast clinic
At the hospital or breast clinic, you may have a:
breast examination
scan – usually a breast X-ray (mammogram) or ultrasound
biopsy – where a needle is inserted into your breast to remove some cells for testing
The tests are often done during the same visit.
You'll usually be told the results on the same day, although biopsy results can take longer – you should get them in a week or two.
Read more about what to expect at a breast clinic appointment from Breast Cancer Now
Causes of nipple discharge
Nipple discharge has many possible causes.
Common causes include:
breastfeeding or pregnancy – see leaking from your nipples
a blocked or enlarged milk duct
a small, non-cancerous lump in the breast
a breast infection (mastitis)
a side effect of a medicine – including the contraceptive pill
Read more about common breast conditions that can cause nipple discharge from Breast Cancer Now
Information:
Nipple discharge by itself is not usually a sign of breast cancer.
Page last reviewed: 26 April 2021
Next review due: 26 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright