Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Measles
Measles is an infection that spreads very easily and can cause serious problems in some people. Having the MMR vaccine is the best way to prevent it.
Check if you or your child has measles
Measles usually starts with cold-like symptoms, followed by a rash a few days later. Some people may also get small spots in their mouth.
Cold-like symptoms
The first symptoms of measles include:
a high temperature
a runny or blocked nose
sneezing
a cough
red, sore, watery eyes
Spots in the mouth
Credit:
Small white spots may appear inside the cheeks and on the back of the lips a few days later. These spots usually last a few days.
The measles rash
A rash usually appears a few days after the cold-like symptoms.
The rash starts on the face and behind the ears before spreading to the rest of the body.
Credit:
The spots of the measles rash are sometimes raised and join together to form blotchy patches. They're not usually itchy.
Credit:
The rash looks brown or red on white skin. It may be harder to see on brown and black skin.
Credit:
Information:
If you're not sure it's measles
It's very unlikely to be measles if you've had both doses of the MMR vaccine or you've had measles before.
See other rashes in babies and children
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you think you or your child may have measles
you've been in close contact with someone who has measles and you've not had measles before or you've not had 2 doses of the MMR vaccine
you've been in close contact with someone who has measles and you're pregnant – measles can be serious in pregnancy
you have a weakened immune system and think you have measles or have been in close contact with someone with measles
Measles can spread to others easily. Call your GP surgery before you go in. They may suggest talking over the phone.
You can also call 111 or get help from 111 online.
How to look after yourself or your child
Measles usually starts to get better in about a week.
After seeing a GP, there are things you can do to help ease the symptoms and reduce the risk of spreading the infection.
It can help to:
rest and drink plenty fluids, such as water, to avoid dehydration
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve a high temperature – do not give aspirin to children under 16 years
use cotton wool soaked in warm water to gently remove any crusts from your or your child's eyes
Important
Stay off nursery, school, or work for at least 4 days from when the rash first appears.
Also try to avoid close contact with babies, people who are pregnant and people with weakened immune systems.
How to avoid spreading or catching measles
Measles is spread when an infected person coughs or sneezes. There are things you can do to reduce the risk of spreading or catching it.
Do
wash your hands often with soap and warm water
use tissues when you cough or sneeze
throw used tissues in the bin
Don’t
do not share cutlery, cups, towels, clothes, or bedding
Complications of measles
Measles can lead to serious problems if it spreads to other parts of the body, such as the lungs or brain.
Problems that can be caused by measles include:
pneumonia
meningitis
blindness
seizures (fits)
These problems are rare, but some people are more at risk. This includes babies and people with weakened immune systems.
Measles in pregnancy
If you get measles when you're pregnant, it could harm your baby.
It can cause:
miscarriage or stillbirth
premature birth (before the 37th week of pregnancy)
your baby having a low birthweight
It's important to get medical advice if you're pregnant and have been in close contact with someone who has measles.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
You or your child has measles and:
shortness of breath
a high temperature that does not come down after taking paracetamol or ibuprofen
confusion
seizures (fits)
Find your nearest A&E
Get vaccinated against measles
The MMR vaccine can prevent measles. It also protects you from mumps and rubella.
The MMR vaccine is offered to all children in the UK. 2 doses can give lifelong protection against measles, mumps, and rubella.
Ask at your GP surgery if you're not sure you or your child have had the vaccine. They can give it for free on the NHS.
Find out more about the MMR vaccine
Page last reviewed: 21 February 2022
Next review due: 21 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright