Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Slipped disc
A slipped disc is when a soft cushion of tissue between the bones in your spine pushes out. It's painful if it presses on nerves. It usually gets better slowly with rest, gentle exercise and painkillers.
Check if it's a slipped disc
A slipped disc (also called a prolapsed or herniated disc) can cause:
lower back pain
numbness or tingling in your shoulders, back, arms, hands, legs or feet
neck pain
problems bending or straightening your back
muscle weakness
pain in the buttocks, hips or legs if the disc is pressing on the sciatic nerve (sciatica)
Not all slipped discs cause symptoms. Many people will never know they have slipped a disc.
Other causes of back pain
Sometimes the pain may be a result of an injury such as a sprain or strain, but often there's no obvious reason.
Back pain is rarely caused by anything serious.
How you can ease the pain from a slipped disc yourself
Keep active
If the pain is very bad, you may need to rest at first. But start gentle exercise as soon as you can – it'll help you get better faster.
The type of exercise is not important, just gradually increase your activity level.
Take painkillers
Alternate painkillers such as ibuprofen and paracetamol. Paracetamol on its own is not recommended for back pain.
Take them regularly (up to the recommended daily amount) rather than just when the pain is particularly bad. This will help you to keep moving.
A pharmacist can help with a slipped disc
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen are not suitable for everyone. Speak to a pharmacist if you're not sure.
Stronger painkillers containing codeine may help for pain that's just started.
But these types of painkillers can cause addiction and should only be used for a few days.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have back pain and:
painkillers are not helping
the pain is no better after a month
a very high temperature or you feel hot and shivery
unexplained weight loss
a swelling in your back
the pain is worse at night
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if you have back pain and:
numbness around your bottom or genitals
cannot pee
lose feeling in 1 or both legs
cannot control when you pee or poo
got it after a serious accident, such as a car accident
What happens at your appointment
Your GP will usually be able to tell if you have a slipped disc from your symptoms.
You may also have a physical examination. Your GP might ask you to raise your arms or do simple leg exercises to find out where the slipped disc is.
Treatment for a slipped disc from a GP
A GP might prescribe a stronger painkiller, a steroid injection or a muscle relaxant to use in the short term.
If your symptoms do not get better, a GP might recommend further tests, like an MRI scan.
They might also refer you to a physiotherapist. Physiotherapy from the NHS might not be available everywhere and waiting times can be long. You can also get it privately.
Find a physiotherapist
Surgery for a slipped disc
Surgery is not usually needed, but a GP might refer to you a specialist to discuss surgery if your symptoms:
have not improved using other treatments
include worsening muscle weakness, or numbness
Alternative treatments for a slipped disc
There's some evidence that manual therapies, like osteopathy, can help ease lower back pain.
You'll usually have to pay for this treatment privately.
What causes a slipped disc
They can happen because of:
ageing
exercising too hard
lifting heavy objects the wrong way
vibration from driving or operating machinery
being inactive or overweight
To help prevent a slipped disc
Do
keep active – take regular exercise
use a safe technique when lifting heavy objects
Don’t
do not smoke – nicotine weakens the disc tissue
Page last reviewed: 22 March 2021
Next review due: 22 March 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright