Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Angina
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Living with
Angina is chest pain caused by reduced blood flow to the heart muscles. It's not usually life threatening, but it's a warning sign that you could be at risk of a heart attack or stroke.
With treatment and healthy lifestyle changes, it's possible to control angina and reduce the risk of these more serious problems.
Symptoms of angina
The main symptom of angina is chest pain.
Chest pain caused by angina usually:
feels tight, dull or heavy – it may spread to your arms, neck, jaw or back
is triggered by physical exertion or stress
stops within a few minutes of resting
Sometimes there might be other symptoms, like feeling sick or breathless.
When to get medical help
If you have not been diagnosed with angina, get an urgent GP appointment if you have an attack of chest pain that stops within a few minutes of resting.
They can check if it might be a heart problem and refer you to a hospital for tests.
Find out more about how angina is diagnosed
Call 999 for an ambulance if you have chest pain that does not stop after a few minutes. This could be a heart attack.
Types
There are 2 main types of angina you can be diagnosed with:
stable angina (more common) – attacks have a trigger (such as stress or exercise) and stop within a few minutes of resting
unstable angina (more serious) – attacks are more unpredictable (they may not have a trigger) and can continue despite resting
Some people develop unstable angina after having stable angina.
Treatment for angina
You'll probably need to take several different medicines for the rest of your life.
You may be given medicine to:
treat attacks when they happen (only taken when needed)
prevent further attacks
reduce the risk of heart attacks and strokes
If medicines are not suitable or do not help, an operation to improve blood flow to your heart muscles may be recommended.
Living with angina
If it's well controlled, there's no reason why you cannot have a largely normal life with angina.
You can usually continue to do most of your normal activities.
One of the most important things you'll need to do is to make healthy lifestyle changes, such as:
having a balanced diet
cutting down on alcohol
stopping smoking if you smoke
losing weight if you're overweight
exercising regularly – gentle exercises are usually safe
This can help reduce your risk of heart attacks and strokes.
Causes of angina
Angina is usually caused by the arteries supplying blood to the heart muscles becoming narrowed by a build-up of fatty substances.
This is called atherosclerosis.
Things that can increase your risk of atherosclerosis include:
an unhealthy diet
a lack of exercise
smoking
increasing age
a family history of atherosclerosis or heart problems
Video: Angina
In this video an expert describes the symptoms, stages and treatment of angina.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 September 2021
Media review due: 1 September 2024
Page last reviewed: 22 April 2021
Next review due: 22 April 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright