Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Femoral hernia repair
Contents
Overview
How it's performed
Recovery
A hernia occurs when an internal part of the body pushes through a weakness in the muscle or surrounding tissue wall.
Your muscles are usually strong and tight enough to keep your intestines and organs in place, but a hernia can develop if there are any weak spots.
Femoral hernia
A femoral hernia is a rare type of hernia.
Femoral hernias sometimes appear as a painful lump in the inner upper part of the thigh or groin. The lump can often be pushed back in or disappears when you lie down. Coughing or straining may make the lump appear.
For information on other types of hernia, see: 
inguinal hernia
hiatus hernia
umbilical hernia
Causes of a femoral hernia
A femoral hernia usually occurs when fatty tissue or a part of your bowel pokes through into your groin at the top of your inner thigh.
It pushes through a weak spot in the surrounding muscle wall (abdominal wall) into an area called the femoral canal.
Unlike inguinal hernias, femoral hernias are far more common in women, particularly older women. This is because of the wider shape of the female pelvis. Femoral hernias are rare in children.
Femoral hernias can sometimes appear suddenly because of strain on the tummy, such as:
straining on the toilet if you have constipation
carrying and pushing heavy loads
They've also been linked to obesity and having a persistent, heavy cough.
When surgery is needed
Femoral hernias can be repaired using surgery to push the bulge back into place and strengthen the weakness in the wall of the tummy.
Unlike some other types of hernia, treatment of femoral hernias is almost always recommended straight away because there's a higher risk of complications developing in these cases.
Complications that can develop as a result of a femoral hernia include:
obstruction – where a section of the bowel becomes stuck in the femoral canal, causing nausea, vomiting and stomach pain, as well as a painful lump in the groin
strangulation – where a section of bowel becomes trapped and its blood supply is cut off; this requires emergency surgery within hours to release the trapped tissue and restore its blood supply, so it does not die
Surgery gets rid of the hernia and prevents any serious complications, although there's a chance of it returning after the operation.
What happens during surgery
There are 2 ways a femoral hernia repair can be performed:
open surgery – where a cut is made to allow the surgeon to push the lump back into your tummy
laparoscopy (keyhole) surgery – a less invasive, but more difficult, technique where several smaller cuts are made, allowing the surgeon to use various instruments to repair the hernia
There are advantages and disadvantages to both methods. The type of surgery you have depends on which method suits you and your surgeon's experience.
You should be able to go home the same day or the day after surgery. It's important to follow the hospital's instructions on how to look after yourself. This includes eating a good diet to avoid constipation, caring for the wound and not straining yourself too soon.
Most people make a full recovery from femoral hernia repair within 6 weeks, although many people can return to driving, work and light activities within 2 weeks.
Read more about:
how femoral hernia repair is performed
recovering from femoral hernia repair
Risks of femoral hernia repair
Femoral hernia repair is a routine operation with very few risks, although in a small number of cases, the hernia returns after the operation.
Other uncommon complications of femoral hernia repair include:
developing a lump under the wound
difficulty passing urine
injury or narrowing of the femoral vein (which passes through the femoral canal)
injury to the bowel
temporary weakness of the leg
injury to the nerves, causing pain or numbness in the groin area
Complications are more likely in older people or those with existing conditions.
Page last reviewed: 11 January 2022
Next review due: 11 January 2025
Next
:
How it's performed
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright