Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Shoulder pain
You can usually do things to ease shoulder pain yourself. See a GP if it does not start feeling better after 2 weeks.
How to ease shoulder pain yourself
You usually need to do these things for 2 weeks before shoulder pain starts to ease.
It can take 6 months or longer to recover from shoulder pain.
Do
stay active and gently move your shoulder
try shoulder exercises for 6 to 8 weeks to stop pain returning – the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy has exercises for shoulder pain
stand up straight with your shoulders down and gently back
sit with a cushion behind your lower back
rest your arm on a cushion in your lap
use pain relief so you can keep moving – try painkillers like paracetamol and ibuprofen, and heat or cold packs
Don’t
do not completely stop using your shoulder – this can stop it getting better
do not do things that seem to make it worse
do not make up your own strenuous exercises or use heavy gym equipment
do not slouch when sitting – do not roll your shoulders or bring your neck forward
Putting heat or cold packs on your shoulder
A pharmacist can help with shoulder pain
They may suggest:
the best painkiller – this might be tablets, or a cream or gel you rub on the skin
other ideas for pain relief and things you can buy to help, like heat and cold packs
seeing a GP if you need to
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the pain is getting worse or does not improve after 2 weeks
it's very difficult to move your arm or shoulder
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Get advice from a GP or 111 now if:
the pain is sudden or very bad
you cannot move your arm
your arm or shoulder has changed shape or is badly swollen
you have pins and needles that do not go away
there's no feeling in your arm or shoulder
your arm or shoulder is hot or cold to touch
the pain started after an injury or accident, like a fall
you develop severe pain in both shoulders
you feel feverish or unwell
These can be signs of something serious, like a broken or dislocated bone, or a torn (ruptured) ligament or tendon.
111 will tell you what to do. They can tell you the right place to get help if you need to see someone.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Treatment from a GP
A GP will examine you to work out what's causing your shoulder pain.
They might send you for tests (such as an X-ray) to check the cause.
They'll suggest a treatment based on the cause, for example:
stronger medicine or injections to ease pain and swelling
physiotherapy or exercises to do at home
things to avoid to stop the pain getting worse or returning
seeing a specialist for tests or treatment
Information:
Physiotherapy for shoulder pain
The number of physiotherapy sessions a GP might prescribe depends on the cause of your shoulder pain.
If you're still in pain after your sessions end, go back to the GP.
They might prescribe more physiotherapy or suggest another treatment.
Physiotherapy from the NHS might not be available everywhere. Waiting times can also be long.
You can also pay to get physiotherapy privately.
Find a registered physiotherapist
Causes of shoulder pain
Shoulder pain that does not improve after 2 weeks might be caused by something that needs treatment.
Do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes of shoulder pain
Shoulder symptoms Possible causes
Pain and stiffness that does not go away over months or years frozen shoulder, arthritis (osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis)
Pain that's often worse while using your arm or shoulder tendonitis, bursitis, impingement
Tingling, numb, weak, feels like it's clicking or locking shoulder instability, sometimes because of hypermobility
Sudden very bad pain, cannot move your arm (or it's difficult), sometimes changes shape dislocated shoulder, broken bone (such as the upper arm or collarbone), torn or ruptured tendon
Pain on top of the shoulder (where the collarbone and shoulder joint meet) problems in the acromioclavicular joint, like dislocation or stretched or torn ligaments
Video: shoulder pain
In this video, an expert explains how to prevent and ease shoulder pain and when to get help.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 November 2021
Media review due: 1 November 2024
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 15 July 2020
Next review due: 15 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright