Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Impetigo
Impetigo is a skin infection that's very contagious but not usually serious. It often gets better in 7 to 10 days if you get treatment. Anyone can get it, but it's very common in young children.
Check if you have impetigo
Impetigo starts with red sores or blisters, but the redness may be harder to see in brown and black skin.
The sores or blisters quickly burst and leave crusty, golden-brown patches.
The patches can:
look a bit like cornflakes stuck to your skin
get bigger
spread to other parts of your body
be itchy
sometimes be painful
Sores (non-bullous impetigo) or blisters (bullous impetigo) can start anywhere – but usually on exposed areas like your face and hands.
Credit:
The sores or blisters burst and form crusty patches.
Credit:
If you're not sure it's impetigo
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you or your child:
might have impetigo
had treatment for impetigo but the symptoms change or get worse
had impetigo before and it keeps coming back
Impetigo is very infectious. Check with the GP before you go into the surgery. They may suggest a phone consultation.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for impetigo from a GP
A GP will check it's not something more serious, like cellulitis.
If it's impetigo, they can prescribe antibiotic cream to speed up your recovery or antibiotic tablets if it's very bad.
Sometimes, the GP might be able to prescribe a non-antibiotic cream.
If your impetigo keeps coming back
A GP can take a swab from around your nose to check for the bacteria that causes impetigo.
They might prescribe an antiseptic nasal cream to try to clear the bacteria and stop the impetigo coming back.
Make sure you finish treatment
Do not stop using the antibiotic cream or tablets early, even if the impetigo starts to clear up.
Stop impetigo spreading or getting worse
Impetigo can easily spread to other parts of your body or to other people until it stops being contagious.
It stops being contagious:
48 hours after you start using the medicine prescribed by your GP
when the patches dry out and crust over (if you do not get treatment)
To help stop impetigo spreading or getting worse while it's still contagious:
Do
stay away from school or work
keep sores, blisters and crusty patches clean and dry
cover them with loose clothing or gauze bandages
wash your hands frequently
wash flannels, sheets and towels at a high temperature
wash or wipe down toys with detergent and warm water if your children have impetigo
Don’t
do not touch or scratch sores, blisters or crusty patches – this also helps stop scarring
do not have close contact with children or people with diabetes or a weakened immune system (if they're having chemotherapy, for example)
do not share flannels, sheets or towels
do not prepare food for other people
do not go to the gym
do not play contact sports like football
How to avoid impetigo
Impetigo usually infects skin that's already damaged.
To avoid spreading the infection to other areas of your body and to other people:
keep cuts, scratches and insect bites clean – for example, by washing them with warm water and soap
get treatment for skin conditions, like eczema
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 18 March 2021
Next review due: 18 March 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright