Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Morton's neuroma
Morton's neuroma is where there's a thickening of tissue around a nerve in your foot that's been irritated or damaged. The symptoms can often be eased with treatments you can try yourself.
Check if you have Morton's neuroma
Morton's neuroma usually affects the nerves between your 3rd and 4th toes.
Credit:
The main symptoms of Morton's neuroma include:
a shooting, stabbing or burning pain
feeling like a pebble or lump is stuck under your foot
Some people may also have tingling or numbness in their foot.
The symptoms may be worse when you move your foot or wear tight or high-heeled shoes. It often gets worse over time.
How you can ease the pain yourself
If you go to a GP, they'll usually suggest you try these things first:
Do
rest and raise your foot when you can
hold an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) in a towel on the painful area for up to 20 minutes every few hours
take ibuprofen or paracetamol
wear wide, comfortable shoes with a low heel and soft sole
use soft insoles or pads you put in your shoes
try to lose weight if you're overweight
avoid or reduce impact activities such as running and jumping
Don’t
do not wear tight, pointy shoes, high heels, or shoes with thin soles
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take
soft pads or insoles for your shoes – ask for metatarsal pads
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the pain is severe or stopping you doing your normal activities
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it yourself for 2 weeks
you have any tingling or numbness in your foot
you have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
What we mean by severe pain
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for Morton's neuroma
A GP can:
look at your foot to see if it's Morton's neuroma
refer you to a foot specialist if they think you need further treatment
Treatment from a foot specialist
Treatments from a foot specialist, such as a podiatrist or foot and ankle surgeon, may include:
specially made soft pads or insoles – to take pressure off the painful area of your foot
non-surgical treatments – such as using heat to treat the nerve (radiofrequency ablation)
steroid or alcohol injections, or foot surgery – if you have very severe symptoms or other treatments are not working
Referral to a podiatrist on the NHS may not be available to everyone and waiting times can be long.
You can pay to see a podiatrist privately.
Find a podiatrist
Causes of Morton's neuroma
Morton's neuroma is caused by an irritated or damaged nerve between the toe bones.
It's often linked to:
wearing tight, pointy or high-heeled shoes
doing a lot of running, or other sports or activities that place pressure on the feet
having other foot problems – such as flat feet, high arches, bunions or hammer toes
Page last reviewed: 12 January 2022
Next review due: 12 January 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright