Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Swollen ankles, feet and legs (oedema)
Swelling in the ankles, feet or legs often goes away on its own. See a GP if it does not get better in a few days.
Common causes of swollen ankles, feet and legs
Swelling in the ankles, feet and legs is often caused by a build-up of fluid in these areas, called oedema.
Oedema is usually caused by:
standing or sitting in the same position for too long
eating too much salty food
being overweight
being pregnant
taking certain medicines – such as some blood pressure medicines, contraceptive pills, hormone therapy, antidepressants or steroids
Oedema can also be caused by:
an injury – such as a strain or sprain
an insect bite or sting
problems with your kidneys, liver or heart
a blood clot
an infection
Information:
Find out more about swollen ankles, feet and fingers in pregnancy
Check if you have oedema
Symptoms of oedema include:
Swollen or puffy ankles, feet or legs.
Credit:
Shiny or stretched skin.
Credit:
Changes in skin colour, discomfort, stiffness and dents when you press on the skin.
How to ease swelling yourself
Swelling in your ankles, feet or legs should go away on its own, but there are some things you can try to help.
Do
raise your legs or the swollen area on a chair or pillows when you can
get some gentle exercise, like walking, to improve your blood flow
wear wide, comfortable shoes with a low heel and soft sole
wash, dry and moisturise your feet to avoid infections
Don’t
do not stand or sit for long periods of time
do not wear clothes, socks or shoes that are too tight
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
1 or both of your ankles, foot or legs are swollen and:
it has not improved after treating it at home for a few days
it gets worse
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have swelling in 1 ankle, foot or leg and there's no obvious cause, such as an injury
the swelling is severe, painful or starts very suddenly
the swollen area is red or feels hot to the touch
your temperature is very high, or you feel hot and shivery
you have diabetes and your feet, ankles or legs are swollen
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
you feel short of breath or are struggling to breathe
your chest feels tight, heavy or painful
you're coughing up blood
You could have a blood clot in your lungs, which needs immediate treatment in hospital.
Treatment for swelling and oedema
Treatment for swelling or oedema that does not go away on its own will depend on the cause. Your GP can help you with the right treatment.
Speak to your GP about making, lifestyle changes, such as losing weight or going on a low-salt diet.
Page last reviewed: 18 January 2022
Next review due: 18 January 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright