Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Mental health Talking therapies, medicine and psychiatry Talking therapies and counselling
Counselling
Counselling is a talking therapy that involves a trained therapist listening to you and helping you find ways to deal with emotional issues.
Sometimes the term "counselling" is used to refer to talking therapies in general, but counselling is also a type of therapy in its own right.
What can counselling help with?
Counselling can help you cope with:
a mental health condition, such as depression, anxiety or an eating disorder
an upsetting physical health condition, such as infertility
a difficult life event, such as a bereavement, a relationship breakdown or work-related stress
difficult emotions – for example, low self-esteem or anger
other issues, such as sexual identity
What to expect from counselling
At your appointment, you'll be encouraged to talk about your feelings and emotions with a trained therapist, who'll listen and support you without judging or criticising.
The therapist can help you gain a better understanding of your feelings and thought processes, and find your own solutions to problems. But they will not usually give advice or tell you what to do.
Counselling can take place:
face to face
in a group
over the phone
by email
online through live chat services (learn more about online tools for mental health)
You may be offered a single session of counselling, a short course of sessions over a few weeks or months, or a longer course that lasts for several months or years.
It can take a number of sessions before you start to see progress, but you should gradually start to feel better with the help and support of your therapist.
Can you get free counselling on the NHS?
You can get free psychological therapies, including counselling for depression, on the NHS.
You do not need a referral from a GP.
You can refer yourself directly to a psychological therapies service.
Find a psychological therapies service in your area
Or you can get a referral from a GP if you prefer.
Find out more about free psychological therapies on the NHS
Private counselling
If you decide to pay to see a private therapist, make sure they're qualified and you feel comfortable with them.
The cost of private counselling can vary depending on where you live, with a session costing anywhere between £10 and £70.
Many private therapists offer an initial free session and lower rates for students, job seekers and those on low wages.
You should ask about charges and agree a price before starting a course of counselling.
Charities and voluntary organisations
Some charities and voluntary organisations also offer counselling. These organisations usually specialise in a particular area, such as couples counselling, bereavement or family guidance.
You do not need a referral from a GP for an appointment for these services, but you may have to pay a fee to cover the cost of your sessions.
Charities that may offer counselling include:
Cruse Bereavement Care – for bereavement advice and support
Rape Crisis England & Wales – for women and girls who have been raped or sexually abused
Relate – for relationship advice and counselling
Samaritans – for people to talk about whatever's troubling them at any time
Victim Support – for victims and witnesses of crime
You may also be able to access support groups through your local community, church or social services.
Finding a qualified therapist
As counselling involves talking about sensitive issues and revealing personal thoughts and feelings, your counsellor should be experienced and professionally qualified.
Reputable therapists will be registered with a professional organisation that's been accredited by the Professional Standards Authority (PSA). This means they have met the PSA's required professional standards to practise.
You can find a qualified therapist in 3 simple steps on the PSA website
Other talking therapies
As well as counselling, there are many other types of psychological therapies (or talking therapies) that involve talking to a therapist about your feelings or problems.
Read more about other talking therapies and how they can help
Video: Psychological therapies for stress, anxiety and depression
Animated video explaining self-referral to psychological therapies services for stress, anxiety or depression.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 14 March 2022
Media review due: 14 March 2025
More in Talking therapies and counselling
Benefits of talking therapies
Types of talking therapy
Self-help therapies
NHS talking therapies
Counselling
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
Page last reviewed: 8 December 2020
Next review due: 8 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright