Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Lichen planus
Lichen planus is a rash that can affect different parts of your body, including the inside of your mouth. See a GP if you think you might have it.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
clusters of shiny, raised, purple-red blotches on your arms, legs or body (you may see fine white lines on the blotches)
white patches on your gums, tongue or the insides of your cheeks
burning and stinging in your mouth, especially when you eat or drink
bald patches appearing on your scalp
sore red patches on your vulva
rough, thinning nails with grooves on
ring-shaped purple or white patches on your penis
These are symptoms of lichen planus. You may only have 1 of these symptoms.
Lichen planus on your skin can be very itchy, but not always.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Lichen planus often appears on the inside of your wrist
Credit:
White patches in your mouth may be lichen planus
Credit:
If you're not sure it's lichen planus
Treatments from a GP
Lichen planus on your skin usually gets better on its own in about 9 to 18 months.
Creams and ointments from a GP can help control the rash and ease itching.
If creams and ointments do not work or you have severe lichen planus, steroid tablets or treatment with a special kind of light (light therapy) can help.
Lichen planus in your mouth can last for several years. Mouthwashes and sprays from a GP can help ease symptoms like burning or sore gums.
You cannot catch lichen planus and it does not usually come back once it's cleared up.
For support and information, see UK Lichen Planus.
How to relieve lichen planus at home
If you have lichen planus on your skin:
wash with plain warm water – avoid soaps and body washes
wash your hair over a sink or bath so the shampoo does not come into contact with the rest of your skin
use an emollient (moisturising treatment for the skin) on the rash
If the lichen planus is on your genitals:
hold a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a clean tea towel against the affected bits to ease itching and swelling
avoid wearing tights or close-fitting clothes
If you have it in your mouth:
brush your teeth carefully twice a day to keep your gums healthy
avoid salty, spicy or acidic foods if they make your mouth sore
avoid alcohol and mouthwashes that contain it
Page last reviewed: 18 September 2020
Next review due: 18 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright