Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Swollen arms and hands (oedema)
Swelling in the arms or hands (oedema) often goes away on its own. See a GP if it does not get better in a few days.
Common causes of swollen arms and hands
Swelling in the arms and hands is often caused by a build-up of fluid in these areas.
It's usually caused by:
staying in the same position for too long
eating too much salty food
being pregnant
taking certain medicines – such as some blood pressure medicines, contraceptive pills, antidepressants and steroids
It can also be caused by:
an injury – such as a strain or sprain
sudden changes in temperature – such as very hot weather
an insect bite or sting
a skin allergy such as angioedema
problems with your kidneys, liver or heart
a blood clot
an infection
some conditions such as lymphoedema or psoriatic arthritis
Information:
Find out more about swollen ankles, feet and fingers in pregnancy
Check if you have oedema
Symptoms of oedema include:
Swollen or puffy arms or hands.
Credit:
Shiny, stretched skin.
Credit:
How to ease swelling yourself
Swelling in your arms or hands should go away on its own, but there are some things you can try to help.
Do
lie down and use pillows to raise the swollen area when you can
move your whole arm and shoulder
try raising your hand above your head while you open and close your fist
massage your arm or hand towards your body using firm but not painful pressure – for example, start at your fingertips and massage towards your palm
get some gentle exercise, like walking, to improve your blood flow
drink plenty of water
wash, dry and moisturise your arms or hands to avoid infections
put your hands in a bath of warm water and then cold water to help move the fluid away from the area
Don’t
do not stay in the same position for long periods of time
do not wear clothes that are too tight
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if your arm or hand is swollen and:
your arm or hand is swollen and it has not improved after treating it at home for a few days
the swelling gets worse
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have swelling in only 1 arm or hand and there's no obvious cause, such as an injury
the swelling is severe, painful or starts very suddenly
the swollen area is red or feels hot to the touch
your arm or hand is swollen and your temperature is very high, or you feel hot and shivery
you have diabetes and your arm or hand is swollen
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
you feel short of breath or are struggling to breathe
your chest feels tight, heavy or painful
You could have a blood clot in your lungs, which needs immediate treatment in hospital.
Treatment for swelling
Treatment for swelling or oedema that does not go away on its own will depend on the cause.
Possible treatments include:
changing your medicine if this is the cause of the swelling
treating any condition that is causing the swelling
diuretics (water pills) to help reduce the swelling
wearing special gloves or sleeves to stop any swelling from coming back (compression aids)
Treatment may also include lifestyle changes, such as losing weight or going on a low-salt diet.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 02 March 2022
Next review due: 02 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright