Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Leukoplakia
Leukoplakia is a white patch in the mouth. If you have a white patch in the mouth that does not go away, get it checked by a dentist or GP.
Check if you have leukoplakia
Leukoplakia patches often appear on the tongue.
Credit:
You can also get them on the inside of your cheeks.
Credit:
Some people get patches on their gums.
Credit:
It's also possible to get patches on the floor or roof of your mouth.
The patches:
are not painful
are an irregular shape
are slightly raised
may be slightly red within the patch
cannot be rubbed or scraped away (patches that can be removed could be oral thrush)
There are also a number of other causes of a white tongue.
Non-urgent advice:
See a dentist or GP if:
you have a white patch in your mouth that has not gone away after 2 weeks
you have a white patch on your tongue and a weakened immune system – for example, you have HIV or have had an organ transplant
What happens at your appointment
Your dentist or GP will examine the patch and be able to rule out other possible causes, like a fungal infection of the mouth (oral thrush) or cheek biting.
You may be referred to a specialist for a biopsy. A small piece of tissue from the patch will be removed and checked for abnormal cells.
Mouth cancer risk
If you have leukoplakia, there's a small risk it could progress to mouth cancer over time.
This is why it's important to see your dentist or GP if you have a white patch in your mouth.
Treatments for leukoplakia
Treatment for leukoplakia is not always needed, but you'll have regular check-ups to make sure the patch is not getting bigger.
The patch may get smaller or go away if you:
stop smoking
reduce the amount of alcohol you drink
An operation is sometimes needed to remove the patch if there's a risk it could become cancerous.
This may be done while the area is numbed (local anaesthetic) or while you're asleep (general anaesthetic).
The patch can be removed in a number of ways, including using a laser or a surgical scalpel. Your mouth should heal quickly afterwards.
Preventing leukoplakia and mouth cancer
In the UK, leukoplakia is mostly caused by smoking. But sometimes the exact cause is not known.
There are things you can do to reduce your risk of getting leukoplakia. These may also reduce your chances of getting mouth cancer.
Do
keep your mouth and teeth healthy by taking care of your teeth and gums
have regular dental check-ups
if you wear dentures, make sure they fit properly
eat a balanced diet, including plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables
Don’t
do not smoke
do not chew tobacco, paan or betel nuts
do not drink more than the recommended amount of alcohol
Hairy leukoplakia
Hairy leukoplakia is a type of leukoplakia caused by the Epstein-Barr virus.
You may have this type if you have a weakened immune system – for example, you have HIV or have had an organ transplant.
It causes fuzzy white patches, often on the sides of the tongue, that look folded or ridged. They're not painful and cannot be brushed or scraped away.
Antiviral medicines, or treatments applied directly to the patch, may be prescribed to treat hairy leukoplakia.
Unlike other types of leukoplakia, hairy leukoplakia does not carry a risk of mouth cancer.
Page last reviewed: 02 March 2021
Next review due: 02 March 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright