Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Phlebitis (superficial thrombophlebitis)
Phlebitis means "inflammation of a vein".
The vein becomes inflamed because there's blood clotting inside it or the vein walls are damaged.
Superficial thrombophlebitis is the term for an inflamed vein near the surface of the skin (usually a varicose vein) caused by a blood clot.
Symptoms of phlebitis
Symptoms of superficial thrombophlebitis include:
painful hard lumps underneath the skin
redness of the skin
This is usually on the lower leg, although it can occasionally affect surface veins in the arms, penis or breast.
Is phlebitis serious?
Superficial thrombophlebitis in a leg is not usually serious.
The blood clot usually clears and the inflammation dies down within a few weeks.
Most people with superficial thrombophlebitis are otherwise well.
There should not be any foul discharge or abscess, and it's normally just lumps under the skin rather than swelling of the whole calf.
This may be painful, but it should not prevent you walking normally.
At-risk groups
You're more at risk of superficial thrombophlebitis if you:
have varicose veins
smoke
are very overweight
take the contraceptive pill or HRT (although these only slightly increase your risk of blood clots)
are pregnant
have had a previous blood clot or another problem with the vein
have recently had injections or a drip put into the vein
have a condition that causes the blood to clot more easily, such as thrombophilia, inflammation of the smaller arteries (polyarteritis) or a high concentration of red blood cells in your blood (polycythaemia)
have cancer
Treatments for phlebitis
Phlebitis is inflammation, not infection, so antibiotics are not helpful.
You can follow this advice to help reduce any pain and swelling:
raise the leg to help reduce swelling
ask your doctor if compression stockings would be suitable for you to help reduce swelling
keep active to keep the blood circulating
press a cold flannel over the vein to ease any pain
take painkillers or anti-inflammatory medicine like ibuprofen – but if you’ve been prescribed anticoagulant (blood-thinning) medicine, do not take aspirin or ibuprofen unless advised to by your doctor
rub an anti-inflammatory cream or gel on the area if the affected area is only small
Outlook
When the inflammation settles, you may be left with darkened skin and the lump may take 3 or 4 months to go. But most people make a full recovery.
If the thrombophlebitis was in a varicose vein, it's likely that the varicose veins will keep coming back, possibly with further episodes of thrombophlebitis. 
This is because there's a basic problem with the vein and you may need this removed.
Find out more about how varicose veins are treated
Risk of deep vein thrombosis
There's a small chance of the blood clot travelling along the vein to where it meets a deeper vein and a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) developing.
This is more likely if the surface clot extends into the upper thigh or groin, or behind the knee (in places where superficial veins meet deeper veins).
It's also more likely to happen if:
the affected vein is a normal vein rather than a varicose vein
you have had a DVT before
you're immobile
A DVT can cause pain, swelling and a heavy ache in your leg. See a GP immediately if you experience these symptoms.
Find out more about DVTs
Page last reviewed: 01 May 2019
Next review due: 01 May 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright