Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism)
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
An overactive thyroid, also known as hyperthyroidism or thyrotoxicosis, is where the thyroid gland produces too much of the thyroid hormones.
The thyroid is a small butterfly-shaped gland in the neck, just in front of the windpipe (trachea). It produces hormones that affect things such as your heart rate and body temperature.
Having too much of these hormones can cause unpleasant and potentially serious problems that may need treatment.
An overactive thyroid can affect anyone, but it's about 10 times more common in women than men, and typically happens between 20 and 40 years of age.
Symptoms of an overactive thyroid
An overactive thyroid can cause a wide range of symptoms, including:
nervousness, anxiety and irritability
mood swings
difficulty sleeping
persistent tiredness and weakness
sensitivity to heat
swelling in your neck from an enlarged thyroid gland (goitre)
an irregular and/or unusually fast heart rate (palpitations)
twitching or trembling
weight loss
Find out more about the symptoms of an overactive thyroid.
When to see a GP
See a GP if you have symptoms of an overactive thyroid.
They'll ask about your symptoms and if they think you might have a thyroid problem, they can arrange for a blood test to check how well your thyroid is working.
If the blood test shows that you have an overactive thyroid, you may be referred for further tests to identify the cause.
Find out more about how an overactive thyroid is diagnosed.
Treatments for an overactive thyroid
An overactive thyroid is usually treatable.
The main treatments are:
medicine that stops your thyroid producing too much of the thyroid hormones
radioiodine treatment – where a type of radiotherapy is used to destroy cells in the thyroid, reducing its ability to produce thyroid hormones
surgery to remove some or all of your thyroid, so that it no longer produces thyroid hormones
Each of these treatments has benefits and drawbacks. You'll usually see a specialist in hormonal conditions (endocrinologist) to discuss which treatment is best for you.
Find out more about how an overactive thyroid is treated.
Causes of an overactive thyroid
There are several reasons why your thyroid can become overactive.
These include:
Graves' disease – a condition where your immune system mistakenly attacks and damages the thyroid (about 3 in every 4 people with an overactive thyroid have Graves' disease)
lumps (nodules) on the thyroid – this extra thyroid tissue can produce thyroid hormones, causing your levels to be too high
some medicines such as amiodarone, which can be used to treat an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
Find out more about the causes of an overactive thyroid.
Further problems
An overactive thyroid can sometimes lead to further problems, particularly if it's not treated or well controlled.
These include:
eye problems – such as eye irritation, double vision or bulging eyes
pregnancy complications – such as pre-eclampsia, premature birth or miscarriage
a thyroid storm – a sudden and life-threatening flare-up of symptoms
Find out more about the complications of an overactive thyroid.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 24 September 2019
Next review due: 24 September 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright