Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Auditory processing disorder (APD)
Auditory processing disorder (APD) is where you have difficulty understanding sounds, including spoken words. There are things you can do that can help.
Symptoms of auditory processing disorder (APD)
APD often starts in childhood but some people develop it later.
If you or your child have APD, you may find it difficult to understand:
people speaking in noisy places
people with strong accents or fast talkers
similar sounding words
spoken instructions
APD is not a hearing problem. People with the condition usually have normal hearing.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you or your child find it hard to hear or understand speech
The GP may refer you to a hearing specialist.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Tests for auditory processing disorder (APD)
To test for APD you may be asked to:
listen to speech with background noise
spot small changes in sounds
fill in missing parts of words
Other tests may include:
having electrodes on your head to measure how your brain reacts to sound
speech and language tests
memory, problem-solving and concentration tests
Testing for APD is not usually done on children under 7 years old.
Treating auditory processing disorder (APD)
There is no cure for APD but there are things that can help.
Treatment usually involves activities to improve listening and concentration. This is called auditory training. You can do it with a hearing specialist or in your own time online.
To reduce background noise, school children with APD may be advised to wear a wireless earpiece that connects to a tiny microphone worn by their teacher.
Things you can do to help with auditory processing disorder (APD)
There are things that you and other people can do to help with your APD.
Do
talk face to face
use pictures and text
repeat or rephrase things if necessary
use carpet and soft furnishings to reduce room noise
Don’t
do not cover your mouth when talking
do not talk in long complicated sentences
do not speak too fast or too slow
do not have background noise, like TV and radio
Causes of auditory processing disorder (APD)
It's not always clear what causes APD.
Possible causes include:
regular ear infections
a faulty gene
head injury
complications at birth
APD is often found in people with attention, language and learning difficulties, such as dyslexia and ADHD.
Page last reviewed: 21 September 2020
Next review due: 21 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright