Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Medically unexplained symptoms
Many people have persistent physical complaints, such as dizziness or pain, that don't appear to be symptoms of a medical condition.
They are sometimes known as "medically unexplained symptoms" when they last for more than a few weeks, but doctors can't find a problem with the body that may be the cause.
This doesn't mean the symptoms are faked or "all in the head" – they're real and can affect your ability to function properly.
Not understanding the cause can make them even more distressing and difficult to cope with.
Common medically unexplained symptoms
Common medically unexplained symptoms include:
pains in the muscles or joints
back pain
headaches
tiredness
feeling faint
chest pain
heart palpitations
stomach problems
About 1 in 4 people who see a GP have physical symptoms that cannot be explained.
Possible causes of medically unexplained symptoms
Many people with medically unexplained symptoms, such as tiredness, pain and heart palpitations, also have depression or anxiety.
Treating an associated psychological problem can often relieve the physical symptoms.
For others, the symptoms may be part of a poorly understood syndrome, such as:
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) – also known as ME
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
fibromyalgia (pain all over the body)
The fact that doctors are unable to find a condition causing these symptoms isn't unusual in medicine, and it doesn't mean that nothing can be done to help you.
How a GP can help
A GP will aim to rule out all the possible conditions that might be causing your symptoms. You may have a thorough physical examination and blood tests.
It's important to consider whether any medicine you're taking may be causing your symptoms – for example, taking painkillers long term can lead to headaches.
The GP should also investigate whether you might have an associated problem, such as depression or anxiety. Physical symptoms can cause depression and anxiety, and these can in turn make the physical symptoms worse, creating a vicious circle.
You should tell the GP:
what your symptoms are like, when they started and what makes them better or worse
what you think is the cause of your symptoms and your expectations of how tests and treatments might help
how your symptoms affect what you can do – what they stop you doing
how upsetting your symptoms are – how they make you feel
There are a number of things you can do yourself that may help.
You and the GP may identify some lifestyle changes and goals that you both think will help relieve your symptoms, such as regular physical activity and better rest.
You may be referred for a talking therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). The aim of CBT is to help you to manage your symptoms by enabling you to understand links between your symptoms, worries, feelings and how you cope.
If your symptoms seem to be caused by a problem with the nervous system, you may be referred to a neurologist (a specialist in disorders of the nervous system).
The neurologist may refer you for psychotherapy but will also consider other therapy options, such as physiotherapy or occupational therapy .
Medicine such as antidepressants can be helpful, even if you're not depressed. However, medicine isn't always the answer – painkillers or sedatives, for example, may lead to dependence. The possible benefits of medicine always need to be weighed against the potential side effects.
If you think you have an underlying condition that's been missed by your doctor, you can ask for a second opinion.
Self-help
There are things you can do to improve or even relieve some physical symptoms, such as taking regular exercise and managing stress.
Regular exercise will help keep you fit and many people find that it also boosts their mood (read about exercise for depression). How much exercise you should do will depend on your current health and capabilities.
Managing stress is very important because it's been linked to problems such as pain and IBS. Learn about breathing exercises for stress.
Generally, planning some pleasurable personal time to unwind should help – whatever helps you relax, whether it's yoga classes, swimming, running, meditation or walking in the countryside.
Read 5 steps to mental wellbeing
Your body has a remarkable ability to recover and there's a good chance that your symptoms will improve in time, even without any specific treatment.
Functional neurological disorder
When symptoms seem to be caused by problems in the nervous system but you don't have a specific neurological condition, doctors may refer to your symptoms as a functional neurological disorder.
Examples of such symptoms include:
numbness or tingling in the hands or feet
weakness in the arms or legs
a tremor in 1 or both arms
blackouts
Page last reviewed: 12 July 2021
Next review due: 12 July 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright