Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Primary biliary cholangitis (primary biliary cirrhosis)
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Treatment
Primary biliary cholangitis (often referred to as primary biliary cirrhosis) is a type of liver disease that can get gradually worse over time. Without treatment, it may eventually lead to liver failure.
Symptoms of PBC
PBC does not always cause symptoms, but some people may experience:
bone and joint aches
fatigue (extreme tiredness)
itchy skin
dry eyes and mouth
pain or discomfort in the upper right side of their tummy
Read more about the symptoms of PBC
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and liver disease from the British Liver Trust
How PBC is diagnosed
Many people are only diagnosed with PBC after having a routine blood test for another reason. PBC can usually be diagnosed just using blood tests.
Once PBC is diagnosed, you'll also need an ultrasound scan to help rule out other problems with your bile ducts and assess your liver.
A liver biopsy is occasionally recommended to assess your liver and help doctors decide on the best treatment.
This involves safely removing a small sample of liver tissue so it can be studied under a microscope.
Causes of PBC
Bile is a liquid produced inside the liver that's used to help digest fats and remove waste products from the body. It passes out of the liver through small tubes called bile ducts.
In PBC, the immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) mistakenly attacks the bile ducts.
It's not clear why this happens, but it's thought to be caused by a combination of subtle differences in how the immune system works.
The bile ducts become damaged and injured, causing bile to build up in the liver. This further damages the liver and may lead to scarring (cirrhosis).
How PBC is treated
PBC is a progressive condition, which means the damage to the liver can steadily get worse over time.
The rate at which PBC progresses varies between individuals. Sometimes, it can take decades.
Without treatment, the liver can become so badly damaged that it no longer works properly. This is known as liver failure and can be fatal.
Liver failure can be prevented in the majority of people being treated for PBC with current treatments such as ursodeoxycholic acid and obeticholic acid.
Other medicines can help relieve the itchiness associated with PBC. Occasionally, if the liver is severely damaged, a liver transplant may be needed.
Read more about treating PBC
Complications of PBC
If PBC is not treated or reaches an advanced stage, there may be other problems including:
osteoporosis – a condition in which the bones become weak and brittle
portal hypertension – increased blood pressure inside the blood vessels in your abdomen
ascites – a build-up of fluid in your abdomen (stomach) and around your intestines
vitamin deficiencies – including vitamins A, D, E and K
a slightly increased risk of developing liver cancer
Page last reviewed: 12 January 2021
Next review due: 12 January 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright