Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Acanthosis nigricans
Acanthosis nigricans is the name for dry, dark patches of skin that usually appear in the armpits, neck or groin. It could be a sign of an underlying condition, so it needs to be checked by a GP.
Check if you have acanthosis nigricans
The main symptom of acanthosis nigricans is patches of skin that are darker and thicker than usual.
They can appear anywhere on the body.
The patches are dry and feel similar to velvet.
Credit:
They're most common in skin folds, such as the armpits, neck or groin.
Credit:
Some people also have tiny growths (skin tags) on the patches.
Credit:
The patches often appear gradually without any other symptoms.
Sometimes the skin may be itchy.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
new dark patches on your skin
any skin changes you're unsure about
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
Although acanthosis nigricans is usually harmless, it's best to get any skin changes checked out.
Rarely, it can be a sign of something more serious, such as cancer.
A GP can usually tell if it's acanthosis nigricans by looking at your skin.
You may need some tests to find out what's causing the patches.
Causes of acanthosis nigricans
The most common cause of acanthosis nigricans is being very overweight.
Other causes include:
type 2 diabetes
conditions that affect hormone levels – such as Cushing's syndrome, polycystic ovary syndrome or an underactive thyroid
taking certain medicines – including steroids or hormone treatments like the contraceptive pill
rarely, cancer – usually stomach cancer
rarely, a faulty gene inherited from your parents
Sometimes healthy people with no other conditions get acanthosis nigricans. This is more common in people with black or brown skin.
Treating acanthosis nigricans
Once a GP knows what's causing acanthosis nigricans, they can recommend the best treatment.
The patches should fade over time once the cause is treated.
If you're very overweight, a GP may recommend losing weight.
Depending on the cause, they may also recommend:
medicine to balance your hormones
medicine to balance your insulin levels
changing your medicine to one that does not cause the patches
There's no specific treatment for the patches themselves. A skin specialist (dermatologist) may be able to suggest treatments to improve their appearance, but finding and treating the cause is usually recommended first.
Page last reviewed: 20 June 2021
Next review due: 20 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright