Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Chilblains
Chilblains are small, itchy, red patches that can appear after you have been in the cold. They usually clear up on their own. You may need to see a GP if they do not go away.
Check if you have chilblains
Chilblains usually appear a few hours after you have been in the cold.
You mostly get them on your fingers and toes. But you can get them on your face and legs, too.
Your skin can feel itchy or like it's burning
Credit:
Your fingers or toes may become red or swollen
Credit:
What you can do about chilblains
Chilblains usually go away on their own in 2 to 3 weeks.
There are things you can try to:
get rid of them yourself
stop them coming back
Do
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain
avoid being outside when it's cold or damp
wear warm, waterproof clothing, gloves and thick socks if you do go out when it's cold or damp
Don’t
do not put your feet or hands on a radiator or under hot water to warm them up
do not smoke or have drinks that have caffeine in them – this can affect the flow of blood in your fingers and toes
do not scratch or pick at your skin
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take
creams that can help to soothe the itching
whether you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your skin has not got any better after 2 to 3 weeks
there is pus coming out of your skin
your temperature is very high or you feel hot or shivery
you keep getting chilblains
you have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
A GP will check where it hurts to see if you have chilblains.
They may need to refer you for further tests with a specialist if they're not sure why you're getting chilblains.
Rarely, the GP will prescribe a medicine that can help your chilblains clear up.
Causes of chilblains
You can get chilblains when it's cold. The cold makes the tiny blood vessels in your fingers and toes get smaller. This stops blood moving around as easily.
If you warm up too quickly, the blood vessels get bigger again and blood rushes to your fingers and toes. This can cause pain, redness and swelling.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 07 November 2018
Next review due: 07 November 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright