Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Paralysis
Paralysis is the loss of the ability to move some or all of your body.
It can have lots of different causes, some of which can be serious. Depending on the cause, it may be temporary or permanent.
Symptoms of paralysis
The main symptom of paralysis is the inability to move part of your body, or not being able to move at all.
It can start suddenly or gradually. Sometimes it comes and goes.
Paralysis can affect any part of the body, including:
the face
the hands
one arm or leg (monoplegia)
one side of the body (hemiplegia)
both legs (paraplegia)
both arms and legs (tetraplegia or quadriplegia)
The affected part of your body may also be:
stiff (spastic paralysis), with occasional muscle spasms
floppy (flaccid paralysis)
numb, painful or tingly
See a GP if you have paralysis
A GP can do some tests if you have paralysis or weakness that:
started gradually
is getting slowly worse
comes and goes
They may refer you to a hospital specialist for more tests if they're unsure what's causing your symptoms.
Call 999 for emergency help
Call 999 for an ambulance if you or someone else has paralysis or weakness that:
starts suddenly
starts after a serious injury, such as a fall or car crash
causes problems with speech, breathing or swallowing
These problems could be a sign of something serious that needs to be treated in hospital straight away.
Causes of paralysis
There are many possible causes of paralysis.
Do not try to identify the cause yourself. See a doctor to get a proper diagnosis.
Main causes
Some of the main causes of paralysis are:
sudden weakness on one side of the face, with arm weakness or slurred speech – a stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA or "mini-stroke")
sudden weakness on one side of the face, with earache or face pain – Bell's palsy
temporary paralysis when waking up or falling asleep – sleep paralysis
paralysis after a serious accident or injury – a severe head injury or spinal cord (back) injury
weakness in the face, arms or legs that comes and goes – multiple sclerosis or, less commonly, myasthenia gravis or hypokalaemia periodic paralysis
Other causes
Other causes of paralysis include:
gradual weakness on one side of the body – a brain tumour
gradual weakness in the legs – hereditary spastic paraplegia, Friedreich's ataxia or muscular dystrophy
gradual weakness in the arms and legs – motor neurone disease, spinal muscular atrophy or Lambert-Eaton mysathenic syndrome
paralysis in the legs that spreads to the arms and face over a few days or weeks – Guillain-Barré syndrome
paralysis from birth – cerebral palsy, spina bifida or spinal muscular atrophy
paralysis that starts in the weeks, months or years after a tick bite – Lyme disease
paralysis that starts many years after a polio infection – post-polio syndrome
gradual weakness in parts of the face – a tumour on a nerve, melanoma skin cancer or head and neck cancer
Treatment and support for paralysis
Paralysis can have a big impact on your life, but support is available to help you live as independently as you can and have the best possible quality of life.
The help you need will largely depend on what's causing your paralysis.
Some of the things that can help people who are paralysed include:
mobility equipment – such as wheelchairs and limb supports (braces)
physiotherapy to help you maintain as much strength and muscle mass as you can
occupational therapy to help adapt your home so everyday tasks like dressing and cooking are easier
medicines to relieve problems such as pain, stiffness and muscle spasms
For more information about the help and support available, see:
Your guide to care and support
Disabled Living Foundation
GOV.UK: Help and advice for disabled people
Headway: The brain injury association
Page last reviewed: 18 November 2020
Next review due: 18 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright