Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Vaginitis
Vaginitis is soreness and swelling in and around the vagina. It's common and usually treatable.
Check if you have vaginitis
Symptoms of vaginitis include:
an itchy or sore vagina
vaginal discharge that's a different colour, smell or thickness to usual
vaginal dryness
pain when peeing or having sex
light vaginal bleeding or spotting
sore, swollen or cracked skin around your vagina
You might not have all these symptoms.
Causes of vaginitis
Vaginitis has lots of possible causes.
Your symptoms might give you an idea what's causing it. But do not self diagnose, get medical help if you're worried.
Common causes of vaginitis
Symptoms Possible cause
White and lumpy discharge (like cottage cheese), itching and soreness Thrush
Yellow, green or smelly discharge, pain when peeing or having sex A sexually transmitted infection like trichomoniasis or chlamydia
A dry, itchy vagina and pain when having sex Hormone changes from the menopause, breastfeeding or some types of contraception
Itchy, sore patches around your vagina and on other parts of your body A skin condition like eczema or lichen planus
Vaginitis can also be caused by irritation (for example, from soap), an injury to your vagina or something in your vagina (like a tampon).
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP or go to a sexual health clinic if:
you have symptoms of vaginitis for the first time
you've had vaginitis before, but the symptoms are bothering you a lot, are different to usual or are not getting better
you have vaginal discharge that's unusual for you
you have symptoms of vaginitis after having sex with a new partner
you have other symptoms like feeling hot and shivery or pain in your lower tummy (pelvic pain)
Do not have sex until you've seen a doctor or nurse. You could have a sexually transmitted infection.
Information:
Sexual health clinics can help with vaginitis
Sexual health clinics treat problems with the genitals and urine system.
Many sexual health clinics offer a walk-in service, where you do not need an appointment. They'll often get test results quicker than GP surgeries.
Find a sexual health clinic.
What happens at your appointment
To find out what's causing your vaginitis, a doctor or nurse may:
ask about any sexual partners you have
look at the skin around your vagina
look inside your vagina (pelvic examination)
Having a pelvic examination
You'll be asked to remove your underwear and lie on your back.
The doctor or nurse will gently put a smooth, tube-shaped tool (speculum) into your vagina to hold it open so they can see inside.
A small cotton bud (swab) may be wiped inside your vagina to check for infections.
You can ask the doctor or nurse to stop at any point if you find it too uncomfortable.
Treatments for vaginitis from a doctor
Treatment for vaginitis depends on the cause.
For example, you may need:
antifungal medicine for thrush
antibiotics for a sexually transmitted infection
vaginal moisturiser, lubricant or hormone treatment for menopause symptoms
steroid medicine for a skin condition
Things you can do to help vaginitis
There are things you can do to ease symptoms of vaginitis and reduce your chances of getting it again.
Do
wash around your vagina with water and dry thoroughly
wear loose, cotton underwear
use pads instead of tampons when you're on your period
use condoms and lubrication when having sex
Don’t
do not clean inside your vagina (douching)
do not have hot baths
do not use scented hygiene products in or around your vagina, such as soaps and deodorants
Page last reviewed: 03 February 2020
Next review due: 03 February 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright