Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Erythema nodosum
Erythema nodosum is swollen fat under the skin causing bumps and patches that look red or darker than surrounding skin. It usually goes away by itself, but it can be a sign of something serious.
Check if you have erythema nodosum
Erythema nodosum usually affects the lower legs, but it can appear on other parts of the body
Credit:
Bumps and patches can feel warm, painful and firm
Credit:
Bumps can measure between 1cm and 5cm
Credit:
You may also have flu-like symptoms, such as:
a high temperature
tiredness
joint and muscle pain
If you're not sure it's erythema nodosum
Check other types of lumps.
How you can ease the pain yourself
try ibuprofen
rest with your feet raised on a pillow
apply a cool wet compress, like a damp cloth
The colour of the bumps and patches usually changes and fades, like a bruise.
The bumps usually heal on their own within 3 to 8 weeks without leaving a scar. But other symptoms, such as joint pain, may last several weeks or months.
A pharmacist can help with erythema nodosum
If you're in pain, a pharmacist can recommend:
stronger painkillers
supportive bandages or stockings
A pharmacist may also suggest you see a GP.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the pain is affecting your daily life
lots of bumps and patches start appearing
the bumps do not go away
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
A GP should be able to tell if you have erythema nodosum by looking at the bumps and patches.
If the GP thinks a medicine you've been taking might be causing erythema nodosum, you may be advised to stop taking it. Do not stop taking your medicines without asking a GP first.
The GP might arrange some tests if erythema nodosum:
could be a sign of something more serious
has not cleared within 8 weeks
Causes of erythema nodosum
Erythema nodosum can be caused by lots of things, but often the cause is not known.
Common causes include:
Crohn's disease
ulcerative colitis
a reaction to some medicines
sarcoidosis
tuberculosis
pneumonia
a throat infection
a fungal infection
Page last reviewed: 09 November 2020
Next review due: 09 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright