Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Shingles
Shingles is an infection that causes a painful rash. Get advice from 111 as soon as possible if you think you have it.
Check if you have shingles
The first signs of shingles can be:
a tingling or painful feeling in an area of skin
a headache or feeling generally unwell
A rash will appear a few days later.
Usually you get the shingles rash on your chest and tummy, but it can appear anywhere on your body including on your face, eyes and genitals.
The rash appears as blotches on your skin, on 1 side of your body only. A rash on both the left and right of your body is unlikely to be shingles.
The blotches become itchy blisters that ooze fluid. A few days later, the blisters dry out and scab.
Credit:
The rash can be red, but this can be harder to see on brown and black skin.
Credit:
The rash can form a cluster that only appears on 1 side of your body. The skin remains painful until after the rash has gone.
Credit:
The rash may be in and around your eye, making it sore and red. It can affect your sight or hearing and make it hard to move 1 side of your face.
Credit:
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 as soon as you suspect shingles
You might need medicine to help speed up your recovery and avoid longer-lasting problems.
This works best if taken within 3 days of your symptoms starting.
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
How to treat shingles symptoms yourself
Do
take paracetamol to ease pain
keep the rash clean and dry to reduce the risk of infection
wear loose-fitting clothing
use a cool compress (a bag of frozen vegetables wrapped in a towel or a wet cloth) a few times a day
Don’t
do not let dressings or plasters stick to the rash
do not use antibiotic cream – this slows healing
How long shingles lasts
It can take up to 4 weeks for the rash to heal.
Your skin can be painful for weeks after the rash has gone, but it usually gets better over time.
Stay away from certain groups of people if you have shingles
You cannot spread shingles to others. But people who have not had chickenpox before could catch chickenpox from you.
This is because shingles is caused by the chickenpox virus.
Try to avoid:
pregnant people who have not had chickenpox before
people with a weakened immune system – like someone having chemotherapy
babies less than 1 month old – unless you gave birth to them, as your baby should be protected from the virus by your immune system
Work and school
Stay off work or school if the rash is still oozing fluid (weeping) and cannot be covered, or until the rash has dried out.
You can only spread the infection to other people while the rash oozes fluid.
You can cover the rash with loose clothing or a non-sticky dressing.
Shingles and pregnancy
If you're pregnant and get shingles, there's no danger to your pregnancy or baby.
But you should be referred to a specialist, as you may need antiviral treatment.
You cannot get shingles from someone with chickenpox
You cannot get shingles from someone with shingles or chickenpox.
But you can get chickenpox from someone with shingles if you have not had chickenpox before.
When people get chickenpox, the virus remains in the body. It can be reactivated later and cause shingles if someone's immune system is lowered.
This can be because of stress, certain conditions, or treatments like chemotherapy.
Shingles vaccination
A shingles vaccine is available on the NHS for people in their 70s. It helps reduce your risk of getting shingles.
If you get shingles after being vaccinated, the symptoms can be much milder.
Ask your GP surgery if you can get the vaccine on the NHS.
Find out more about who can have the shingles vaccine
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 01 July 2021
Next review due: 01 July 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright