Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Euthanasia and assisted suicide
Euthanasia is the act of deliberately ending a person's life to relieve suffering.
For example, it could be considered euthanasia if a doctor deliberately gave a patient with a terminal illness a drug they do not otherwise need, such as an overdose of sedatives or muscle relaxant, with the sole aim of ending their life.
Assisted suicide is the act of deliberately assisting another person to kill themselves. If a relative of a person with a terminal illness obtained strong sedatives, knowing the person intended to use them to kill themselves, the relative may be considered to be assisting suicide.
The law
Both euthanasia and assisted suicide are illegal under English law.
Assisted suicide
Assisted suicide is illegal under the terms of the Suicide Act (1961) and is punishable by up to 14 years' imprisonment. Trying to kill yourself is not a criminal act.
Euthanasia
Depending on the circumstances, euthanasia is regarded as either manslaughter or murder. The maximum penalty is life imprisonment.
Types of euthanasia
Euthanasia can be classified as:
voluntary euthanasia – where a person makes a conscious decision to die and asks for help to do so
non-voluntary euthanasia – where a person is unable to give their consent (for example, because they're in a coma) and another person takes the decision on their behalf, perhaps because the ill person previously expressed a wish for their life to be ended in such circumstances
End of life care
When you're approaching the last stage of your life, you have a right to high quality, personalised end of life care that helps you live as well as possible until you die.
Find out more about:
where you can receive your care, including in a hospice
coping with a terminal diagnosis
ways to start talking about the fact you're dying
managing pain and other symptoms
coping financially and benefits entitlement
making a legally binding advance decision to refuse treatment
creating a lasting power of attorney so someone you trust can make decisions for you if you cannot make them in the future
why it can help to plan ahead for your future care
Find palliative care services near you.
Page last reviewed: 28 July 2020
Next review due: 28 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright