Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Chemotherapy
Contents
Overview
What happens
Side effects
Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment where medicine is used to kill cancer cells.
There are many different types of chemotherapy medicine, but they all work in a similar way.
They stop cancer cells reproducing, which prevents them from growing and spreading in the body.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer treatment:
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer treatment
Macmillan: Cancer treatment and coronavirus
When chemotherapy is used
Chemotherapy may be used if cancer has spread or there's a risk it will.
It can be used to:
try to cure the cancer completely (curative chemotherapy)
make other treatments more effective – for example, it can be combined with radiotherapy (chemoradiation) or used before surgery (neo-adjuvant chemotherapy)
reduce the risk of the cancer coming back after radiotherapy or surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy)
relieve symptoms if a cure is not possible (palliative chemotherapy)
The effectiveness of chemotherapy varies significantly. Ask your doctors about the chances of treatment being successful for you.
Types of chemotherapy
Chemotherapy can be given in several ways. Your doctors will recommend the best type for you.
The most common types are:
chemotherapy given into a vein (intravenous chemotherapy) – this is usually done in hospital and involves medicine being given through a tube in a vein in your hand, arm or chest
chemotherapy tablets (oral chemotherapy) – this usually involves taking a course of medicine at home, with regular check-ups in hospital
You may be treated with one type of chemotherapy medicine or a combination of different types.
You'll usually have several treatment sessions, which will typically be spread over the course of a few months.
Side effects of chemotherapy
As well as killing cancer cells, chemotherapy can damage some healthy cells in your body, such as blood cells, skin cells and cells in the stomach.
This can cause a range of unpleasant side effects, such as:
feeling tired most of the time
feeling and being sick
hair loss
an increased risk of getting infections
a sore mouth
dry, sore or itchy skin
diarrhoea or constipation
Many of these side effects can be treated or prevented and most, if not all, will pass after treatment stops.
Page last reviewed: 29 January 2020
Next review due: 29 January 2023
Next
:
What happens
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright