Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Rectal examination
A rectal examination is where a doctor or nurse uses their finger to check for any problems inside your bottom (rectum). It's usually very quick and you should not feel any pain.
When a rectal examination may be needed
A rectal examination is sometimes needed to investigate:
bleeding from the bottom
pain in the bottom
constipation
being unable to control when you go to the toilet (incontinence) – including bowel incontinence or urinary incontinence
Men sometimes need a rectal examination to check for problems with the prostate.
What is the prostate?
Before having a rectal examination
Your doctor or nurse should explain what's going to happen and why you need a rectal examination.
They'll know that some people can feel embarrassed, but it's a common procedure.
Let the doctor or nurse know if:
you'd prefer a man or woman to perform the examination
you'd like someone else in the room – it could be a friend, family member or another doctor or nurse
you have severe pain in your bottom – they may be able to use local anaesthetic to numb the area
What happens during a rectal examination
First, you'll be asked to undress from the waist down. If you're wearing a loose skirt, you can usually just remove your underwear.
Let the doctor or nurse know if you'd like to get changed behind a curtain or be alone in the room.
The doctor or nurse will:
Ask you to lie down on your left side, with your knees lifted up towards your chest. This is the easiest position to examine your rectum.
Put on some gloves and look at the outside of your bottom for any problems.
Put some lubricating gel on 1 finger and gently slide it into your rectum. This should not be painful, but may be a little bit uncomfortable.
Sometimes ask you to squeeze around their finger so they can assess how well the muscles are working.
If you're a man, the doctor or nurse may press on your prostate. This can make you feel the urge to pee, but it should not hurt.
Once you're dressed, they'll discuss the results of the examination with you.
Page last reviewed: 23 December 2020
Next review due: 23 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright