Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
High temperature (fever) in adults
What is a high temperature?
Normal body temperature is different for everyone and changes during the day.
A high temperature is usually considered to be 38C or above. This is sometimes called a fever.
Many things can cause a high temperature, but it's usually caused by your body fighting an infection.
Check if you have a high temperature
You may have a high temperature if:
your chest or back feel hotter than usual
you have other symptoms, such as shivering (chills), sweating or warm, red skin
a thermometer says your temperature is 38C or above
Important:
Could it be coronavirus (COVID-19)?
A high temperature could be COVID-19.
Get advice about symptoms of COVID-19 and what to do
Do I need to take my temperature?
You do not need to take your temperature using a thermometer, but you can if you have one.
Make sure you use it correctly to help get an accurate result. See how to take a temperature.
Important
If you feel hot or shivery, you may have a high temperature even if a thermometer says your temperature is below 38C.
Treating a high temperature
It can help to:
get lots of rest
drink plenty of fluids (water is best) to avoid dehydration – drink enough so your pee is light yellow and clear
take paracetamol or ibuprofen if you feel uncomfortable
Advice for children
This page is for adults. For advice about children, see fever in children.
Page last reviewed: 06 April 2020
Next review due: 06 April 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright