Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Huntington's disease
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Tests
Treatment and support
Huntington's disease is a condition that stops parts of the brain working properly over time. It's passed on (inherited) from a person's parents.
It gets gradually worse over time and is usually fatal after a period of up to 20 years.
Symptoms
The symptoms usually start at 30 to 50 years of age, but can begin much earlier or later.
Symptoms of Huntington's disease can include:
difficulty concentrating and memory lapses
depression
stumbling and clumsiness
involuntary jerking or fidgety movements of the limbs and body
mood swings and personality changes
problems swallowing, speaking and breathing
difficulty moving
Full-time nursing care is needed in the later stages of the condition.
Read more about the symptoms of Huntington's disease.
How it's inherited
Huntington's disease is caused by a faulty gene that results in parts of the brain becoming gradually damaged over time.
You're usually only at risk of developing it if one of your parents has or had it. Both men and women can get it.
If a parent has the Huntington's disease gene, there's a:
1 in 2 (50%) chance of each of their children developing the condition – affected children are also able to pass the gene to any children they have
1 in 2 (50%) chance of each of their children never developing the condition – unaffected children can't pass the condition on to any children they have
Very occasionally, it's possible to develop Huntington's disease without having a history of it in your family. But this is usually just because one of your parents was never diagnosed with it.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP for advice if:
you're worried you might have symptoms of Huntington's disease – especially if someone in your family has or had it
you have a history of the condition in your family and you want to find out if you will get it, too
you have a history of the condition in your family and you're planning a pregnancy
Your GP may refer you to a specialist for tests to check for Huntington's disease.
Treatment and support
There's currently no cure for Huntington's disease or any way to stop it getting worse.
But treatment and support can help reduce some of the problems it causes, such as:
medicines for depression, mood swings and involuntary movements
occupational therapy to help make everyday tasks easier
speech and language therapy for feeding and communication problems
physiotherapy to help with movement and balance
Read more about treatment and support for Huntington's disease.
Further information and advice
Living with Huntington's disease can be very distressing and frustrating for the person with the condition, as well as their loved ones and carers.
You may find The Huntington's Disease Association a useful source of information and support.
They offer:
information about Huntington's disease
a specialist advisory service
local branches and support groups
an online forum
Video: Huntington's disease
Watch this video for advice on Huntington's disease and the importance of getting tested.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 April 2021
Media review due: 1 April 2024
Page last reviewed: 29 March 2021
Next review due: 29 March 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright