Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Indigestion
Most people have indigestion at some point. Usually, it's not a sign of anything more serious and you can treat it yourself.
How to tell if you have indigestion (dyspepsia)
You can have the following symptoms after eating or drinking:
heartburn – a painful burning feeling in the chest, often after eating
feeling full and bloated
feeling sick
belching and farting
bringing up food or bitter-tasting fluids into your mouth
When it's not indigestion
Stomach ache or back pain are usually not symptoms of indigestion. If you have those you might be constipated.
Indigestion, heartburn and acid reflux – what's the difference?
Heartburn and acid reflux are the same thing – when acid from your stomach comes up your throat. You'll have a burning feeling when this happens. This can be a symptom of indigestion.
How you can treat indigestion yourself
There's usually no need to see a GP about indigestion. There are some things you can do at home.
Do
cut down on tea, coffee, cola or alcohol
prop your head and shoulders up in bed – this can stop stomach acid coming up while you sleep
lose weight if you're overweight
Don’t
eat 3 to 4 hours before going to bed
have rich, spicy or fatty foods
take ibuprofen or aspirin – this can make indigestion worse
smoke
A pharmacist can help with indigestion
A pharmacist can recommend medicines to ease the burning feeling or pain that can come with indigestion.
Medicines that help reduce acid in your stomach include:
antacids
proton pump inhibitors
Some indigestion medicines are best to take after eating as their effects last longer. Check the information leaflet that comes with the medicines for more information.
Find a pharmacy
Pregnant women: treating indigestion
Pregnant women often get indigestion. It's very common from 27 weeks onwards.
It can be caused by hormonal changes and the growing baby pressing against the stomach.
A pharmacist can help with uncomfortable feelings or pain. They can recommend the best medicines to use when you're pregnant.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you:
keep getting indigestion
are in severe pain
are 55 or older
have lost a lot of weight without meaning to
have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)
keep being sick
have iron deficiency anaemia
feel like you have a lump in your stomach
have bloody vomit or poo
These symptoms can be a sign of something more serious.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What causes indigestion
The acid in your stomach can irritate the stomach lining or your throat. This causes indigestion and gives you a burning feeling and pain.
Other things that can cause indigestion include:
medicines
smoking
alcohol
a type of bacterial infection called helicobacter pylori
Stress can make indigestion worse.
Illnesses that can cause indigestion
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 21 May 2020
Next review due: 21 May 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright