Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Snoring
Snoring is very common and is not usually caused by anything serious. There are things that can help if it's a problem.
Things you can do to help you stop snoring
Simple lifestyle changes can help stop or reduce snoring.
Do
try to lose weight if you're overweight
sleep on your side – try taping or stitching a tennis ball to the back of your sleepwear, or buy a special pillow or bed wedge to help keep you on your side
consider asking your partner to use earplugs if your snoring affects their sleep
Don’t
do not smoke
do not drink too much alcohol
do not take sleeping pills – these can sometimes cause snoring
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
lifestyle changes are not helping
your snoring is having a big impact on your or your partner's life
you feel sleepy during the day, or make gasping or choking noises while you sleep – you may have sleep apnoea, which can be serious if not treated
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will look inside your mouth and nose to check for any problems that might be causing your snoring.
It can help to bring someone with you to your appointment who can describe what your snoring is like, such as a partner.
The GP may refer you to a specialist for treatment or further tests if they're not sure what the cause is.
Treatment for snoring depends on the cause
Talk to a doctor about the best treatment for you.
Treatment for snoring depends on the cause
Possible cause Treatments
Tongue partially blocking the back of your throat a device you wear in your mouth to bring your tongue forward (mandibular advancement device)
Mouth falling open when you're asleep a chin strap to hold your mouth closed, or a device you wear in your mouth to make you breathe through your nose while you sleep (vestibular shield)
Blocked or narrow airways in your nose special devices (nasal dilators) or strips that hold your nose open while you sleep, or sprays to reduce swelling inside your nose
Surgery for snoring
Surgery is sometimes used to treat snoring if other treatments do not help.
But it's not widely available on the NHS, it does not always work and snoring can come back afterwards.
Causes of snoring
Snoring is caused by things such as your tongue, mouth, throat or airways in your nose vibrating as you breathe.
It happens because these parts of your body relax and narrow when you're asleep.
You're more likely to snore if you:
are overweight
smoke
drink too much alcohol
sleep on your back
Sometimes it's caused by a condition like sleep apnoea, which is when your airways become temporarily blocked as you sleep.
Page last reviewed: 03 September 2020
Next review due: 03 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright