Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Colic
Colic is when a baby cries a lot but there's no obvious cause. It's a common problem that should get better on its own. But call NHS 111 or see a GP if you're worried.
Check if your baby has colic
All babies cry, but your baby may have colic if they cry more than 3 hours a day, 3 days a week for at least 1 week.
They may cry more often in the afternoon and evening.
It may also be colic if:
it's hard to soothe or settle your baby
they clench their fists
they go red in the face
they bring their knees up to their tummy or arch their back
their tummy rumbles or they're very windy
It can start when a baby is a few weeks old. It usually stops by the time they're 6 months old.
If you're not sure it's colic
Things you can try to soothe your baby
Your baby does not usually need to see a doctor if they have colic. Speak to your health visitor for advice and support.
Health visitors and doctors will usually advise you to:
hold or cuddle your baby when they're crying a lot
sit or hold your baby upright during feeding to stop them swallowing air
wind your baby after feeds
gently rock your baby over your shoulder
gently rock your baby in their Moses basket or crib, or push them in their pram
bath your baby in a warm bath
have some gentle white noise like the radio or TV in the background to distract them
keep feeding your baby as usual
Other things you may hear about include:
anti-colic drops and herbal and probiotic supplements
changes to your diet if you're breastfeeding
applying gentle pressure to your baby's spine (spinal manipulation) or skull (cranial osteopathy)
But there's very little evidence these things work. Speak to your health visitor for further advice.
Non-urgent advice:
Call NHS 111 or see a GP if:
you're worried about your baby
nothing seems to be working
you're finding it hard to cope
your baby is older than 4 months and still seems to have symptoms of colic
A GP will check for possible causes of your baby's crying.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if:
your baby has a weak or high-pitched cry
your baby's cry does not sound like their normal cry
You know better than anyone else what your child is usually like. Trust your instincts if you think something is seriously wrong, particularly if they have other worrying symptoms.
Find your nearest A&E
How to cope if you have a colicky baby
Looking after a colicky baby can be upsetting, but it's usually nothing to worry about and will pass with time.
Ask for support:
from other parents, family or friends
by calling the Cry-sis helpline on 0845 122 8669 (9am to 10pm, 7 days a week)
from your health visitor, by calling NHS 111 or seeing a GP
Causes of colic
It's not known exactly what causes some babies to get colic. But it may be because babies find it harder to digest food when they're young.
Or they may be crying because they have problems with food allergies, such as a cows' milk allergy.
Page last reviewed: 09 November 2018
Next review due: 09 November 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright