Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Diarrhoea and vomiting
Diarrhoea and vomiting are common in adults, children and babies. They're often caused by a stomach bug and should stop in a few days.
The advice is the same if you have diarrhoea and vomiting together or separately.
How to treat diarrhoea and vomiting yourself
You can usually treat yourself or your child at home. The most important thing is to have lots of fluids to avoid dehydration.
Do
stay at home and get plenty of rest
drink lots of fluids, such as water or squash – take small sips if you feel sick
carry on breast or bottle feeding your baby – if they're being sick, try giving small feeds more often than usual
give babies on formula or solid foods small sips of water between feeds
eat when you feel able to – you do not need to eat or avoid any specific foods
take paracetamol if you're in discomfort – check the leaflet before giving it to your child
Don’t
do not have fruit juice or fizzy drinks – they can make diarrhoea worse
do not make baby formula weaker – use it at its usual strength
do not give children under 12 medicine to stop diarrhoea
do not give aspirin to children under 16
How long diarrhoea and vomiting last
In adults and children:
diarrhoea usually stops within 5 to 7 days
vomiting usually stops in 1 or 2 days
Diarrhoea and vomiting can spread easily
Important
Stay off school or work until you've not been sick or had diarrhoea for at least 2 days.
To help avoid spreading an infection:
Do
wash your hands with soap and water frequently
wash any clothing or bedding that has poo or vomit on it separately on a hot wash
clean toilet seats, flush handles, taps, surfaces and door handles every day
Don’t
do not prepare food for other people, if possible
do not share towels, flannels, cutlery or utensils
do not use a swimming pool until 2 weeks after the symptoms stop
A pharmacist can help with diarrhoea and vomiting
Speak to a pharmacist if:
you or your child (over 5 years) have signs of dehydration – such as dark, smelly pee or peeing less than usual
you need to stop diarrhoea for a few hours
They may recommend:
oral rehydration sachets you mix with water to make a drink
medicine to stop diarrhoea for a few hours (like loperamide) – not suitable for children under 12
Information:
Call a pharmacy or contact them online before going in person. You can get medicines delivered or ask someone to collect them.
Find a pharmacy
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you're worried about a baby under 12 months
your child stops breast or bottle feeding while they're ill
a child under 5 years has signs of dehydration – such as fewer wet nappies
you or your child (over 5 years) still have signs of dehydration after using oral rehydration sachets
you or your child keep being sick and cannot keep fluid down
you or your child have bloody diarrhoea or bleeding from the bottom
you or your child have diarrhoea for more than 7 days or vomiting for more than 2 days
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if you or your child:
vomit blood or have vomit that looks like ground coffee
have green or yellow-green vomit
might have swallowed something poisonous
have a stiff neck and pain when looking at bright lights
have a sudden, severe headache or stomach ache
What we mean by severe pain
Find your nearest A&E
Causes of diarrhoea and vomiting
You probably will not know exactly what the cause is, but the main causes of diarrhoea and vomiting are treated in the same way.
The most common causes are:
a stomach bug (gastroenteritis)
norovirus – also called the "vomiting bug"
food poisoning
Other causes of diarrhoea or vomiting
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 07 December 2020
Next review due: 07 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright