Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Gastroscopy
Contents
Overview
Why it's used
How it's performed
Risks
A gastroscopy is a procedure where a thin, flexible tube called an endoscope is used to look inside the oesophagus (gullet), stomach and first part of the small intestine (duodenum).
It's also sometimes referred to as an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
The endoscope has a light and a camera at one end. The camera sends images of the inside of your oesophagus, stomach and duodenum to a monitor.
Why a gastroscopy may be used 
A gastroscopy can be used to:
investigate problems such as dysphagia (swallowing problems) or persistent stomach ache
diagnose conditions such as stomach ulcers or gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD), which is when you keep getting heartburn and acid reflux
treat conditions such as bleeding ulcers, a blockage in the oesophagus, non-cancerous growths (polyps) or small cancerous tumours
A gastroscopy used to check symptoms or confirm a diagnosis is known as a diagnostic gastroscopy. A gastroscopy used to treat a condition is known as a therapeutic gastroscopy.
Read more about why gastroscopy is used.
The gastroscopy procedure
A gastroscopy often takes less than 15 minutes, although it may take longer if it's being used to treat a condition.
It's usually carried out as an outpatient procedure, which means you will not have to spend the night in hospital.
Before the procedure, your throat will be numbed with a local anaesthetic spray. You can also choose to have a sedative, if you prefer. This means you will still be awake, but will be drowsy and have reduced awareness about what's happening.
The doctor carrying out the procedure will place the endoscope in the back of your mouth and ask you to swallow the first part of the tube. It will then be guided down your oesophagus and into your stomach.
The procedure is not usually painful, but it may be unpleasant or uncomfortable at times. 
Read more about how a gastroscopy is performed.
What are the risks?
A gastroscopy is a very safe procedure, but like all medical procedures it does carry a risk of complications.
Possible complications that can occur include:
a reaction to the sedative, which can cause problems with your breathing, heart rate and blood pressure
internal bleeding
tearing (perforation) of the lining of your oesophagus, stomach or duodenum
Read more about the risks with a gastroscopy.
Page last reviewed: 14 October 2021
Next review due: 14 October 2024
Next
:
Why it's used
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright