Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Statins
Contents
Overview
Uses
Considerations
Side effects
Statins are a group of medicines that can help lower the level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in the blood.
LDL cholesterol is often referred to as "bad cholesterol", and statins reduce the production of it inside the liver.
Why have I been offered statins?
Having a high level of LDL cholesterol is potentially dangerous, as it can lead to a hardening and narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and cardiovascular disease (CVD).
CVD is a general term that describes a disease of the heart or blood vessels. It's the most common cause of death in the UK.
The main types of CVD are:
coronary heart disease – when the blood supply to the heart becomes restricted
angina – chest pain caused by reduced blood flow to the heart muscles
heart attacks – when the supply of blood to the heart is suddenly blocked
stroke – when the supply of blood to the brain becomes blocked
A doctor may recommend taking statins if either:
you have been diagnosed with a form of CVD
your personal and family medical history suggests you're likely to develop CVD at some point over the next 10 years and lifestyle measures have not reduced this risk
Find out more about when statins may be recommended.
Taking statins
Statins come as tablets that are taken once a day.
For some types of statin it does not matter what time of day you take it, as long as you stick to the same time.
Some types of statin should be taken in the evening.
Check with your doctor whether there's a particular time of day you should take your statin.
You usually have to continue taking statins for life because if you stop taking them, your cholesterol will return to a high level within a few weeks.
If you forget to take your dose, do not take an extra one to make up for it. Just take your next dose as usual the following day.
If you accidentally take too many statin tablets (more than your usual daily dose), contact a doctor or pharmacist for advice or call NHS 111.
Cautions and interactions
Statins can sometimes interact with other medicines, increasing the risk of unpleasant side effects, such as muscle damage.
Some types of statin can also interact with grapefruit juice.
It's very important to read the information leaflet that comes with your medicine to check if there are any interactions you should be aware of.
If in doubt, contact a GP or pharmacist for advice.
Find out more things to consider when taking statins.
Side effects of statins
Many people who take statins experience no or very few side effects.
Others experience some troublesome, but usually minor, side effects, such as diarrhoea, a headache or feeling sick.
Your doctor should discuss the risks and benefits of taking statins if they're offered to you.
The risks of any side effects also have to be balanced against the benefits of preventing serious problems. 
A review of scientific studies into the effectiveness of statins found around 1 in every 50 people who take the medicine for 5 years will avoid a serious event, such as a heart attack or stroke, as a result.
Find out more about the side effects of statins.
Alternatives to statins
If you're at risk of developing CVD in the near future, your doctor will usually recommend lifestyle changes to reduce this risk before they suggest that you take statins.
Lifestyle changes that can reduce your cholesterol level and CVD risk include:
eating a healthy, balanced diet
exercising regularly
maintaining a healthy weight
limiting the amount of alcohol you drink
stopping smoking
Statins may be recommended if these measures do not help.
Read more about treating high cholesterol and preventing CVD.
Types of statin
There are 5 types of statin available on prescription in the UK:
atorvastatin (Lipitor)
fluvastatin (Lescol)
pravastatin (Lipostat)
rosuvastatin (Crestor)
simvastatin (Zocor)
Page last reviewed: 19 November 2018
Next review due: 19 November 2021
Next
:
Uses
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright