Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Limping in children
Limping in children is not usually serious and could be caused by something minor like a sprain or strain. But you should see a GP if it's not obvious what's causing it.
Causes of limping in children
Limping in children is often caused by an obvious injury to the leg or foot, such as:
a sprain or strain
a blister, cut or bruise
a broken bone
Sometimes it may not be clear what's causing your child to limp. The symptoms might give you an idea of what the cause might be.
But do not self-diagnose – a limp with no obvious cause should always be checked by a GP as it could be a sign of something serious.
Other causes of limping in children
Other symptoms Possible cause
Sudden pain in the hip, knee or thigh, sometimes after a viral infection Irritable hip
Pain in the groin, hip or knee, stiff hip, foot or leg turns inward Slipped upper femoral epiphysis
Painful, swollen joints that lasts for longer than 6 weeks Different types of juvenile arthritis
Pain in the groin, thigh or knee after exercise, stiff hip Perthes' disease
A lump on your child's leg, weight loss, pain at night A cancer, such as leukaemia, sarcoma or lymphoma
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your child has a limp and you're not sure what's causing it
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
your child gets sudden pain in their hip, knee or thigh (hip problems can sometimes be felt in the thigh or knee)
your child cannot put any weight on their leg
the leg has changed shape or is pointing at an odd angle
your child feels generally unwell and has a high temperature or feels hot and shivery
your child also has severe pain in the lower part of their tummy
your child's symptoms get worse
Find your nearest A&E
What we mean by severe pain
Treatment from a GP
Treatment will depend on what's causing your child to limp. Sometimes it may get better on its own.
A GP will examine your child and may arrange for more tests to find out what's causing your child to limp.
They might:
give you advice on how to treat a sprain or strain at home, such as rest and taking paracetamol or ibuprofen
refer you to hospital for an X-ray or to a specialist (for example, a paediatric orthopaedic surgeon) to help find the cause
Page last reviewed: 06 January 2022
Next review due: 06 January 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright