Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Bone cyst
Bone cysts are fluid-filled holes that form in bones. They mainly affect children and teenagers. They're not usually serious, but they sometimes need to be treated with surgery.
Bone cysts are not always treated
A bone cyst may not need treatment if it's small and not causing any problems.
They often get better on their own, especially in children and teenagers.
You may have regular X-rays for a few years to check your bone is healing and the cyst is not getting bigger.
Treatments for bone cysts
A bone cyst might need to be treated if it's:
large or getting bigger – this could make the bone weaker and more likely to break (fracture) if you injure it
causing problems like pain, swelling or a lump
The main treatments are:
draining the fluid with a needle and injecting medicine into the bone to help it heal – this may need to be done several times over a few months
cutting or scraping out the cyst – the hole may be filled with small pieces of bone taken from another part of your body or from a donor, or with a bone cement mixture
Treatment is done under general anaesthetic. You will not usually need to stay in hospital overnight.
Recovering after treatment
It normally takes at least a few months for the bone to heal.
You may need to avoid activities or sports that could damage the bone until it has healed.
You'll have regular X-rays for a few years to check it's getting better.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you get a lump, pain or swelling after treatment
This could mean the cyst has come back or you've developed an infection from surgery.
It's quite common for bone cysts to come back, especially in the first couple of years after treatment.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Causes of bone cysts
The exact cause of bone cysts is unknown. They're not cancer and do not spread to other parts of the body.
The main types of cyst are thought to have different causes:
unicameral bone cysts – fluid-filled holes that may form if fluid does not drain properly from a bone as it's growing
aneurysmal bone cysts – blood-filled holes that may be caused by a problem with the blood vessels in a bone (possibly due to an injury or a non-cancerous growth)
Page last reviewed: 13 October 2020
Next review due: 13 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright