Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Retinal migraine
Retinal migraine (ocular migraine) is an eye condition that causes brief attacks of blindness or visual problems like flashing lights in 1 eye.
These episodes can be frightening, but in most cases they're harmless and shortlived, and eyesight goes back to normal afterwards.
Some people get retinal migraine every few months, although the frequency can vary.
Retinal migraine is a separate condition and should not be confused with headache-type migraine or migraine with aura, which usually affects the vision of both eyes.
Symptoms of retinal migraine
The symptoms of retinal migraine may include:
partial or total loss of vision in 1 eye – this usually lasts 10 to 20 minutes before vision gradually returns
headache – this may happen before, during or after the vision attack
It's unusual for an episode of vision loss to last longer than an hour. The same eye is affected every time in almost all cases.
Vision may slowly become blurred or dimmed, or there may be flashes of light. Some people see a mosaic-like pattern of blank spots (scotomas), which enlarge to cause total loss of vision.
When to seek medical advice
If your eyesight suddenly deteriorates, make an emergency appointment to see an optician trained to recognise eye abnormalities and signs of eye disease (optometrist), your GP, or call NHS 111.
Use our directory to find opticians or find GP services.
It's important to see an optometrist or medical doctor urgently if you suddenly lose your eyesight, particularly if it occurs for the first time. There are other more serious causes of sight loss that doctors will want to rule out.
Diagnosing retinal migraine
If you manage to see a GP or optometrist during an attack, they may be able to see the decreased bloodflow to your eye using an instrument called an ophthalmoscope.
In this case the GP or optometrist may be able to make a confident diagnosis of retinal migraine.
However, as attacks are usually brief it's more likely you'll be diagnosed based on an account of your symptoms.
You may be referred to an eye specialist for tests to rule out other more serious eye diseases or stroke.
Causes of retinal migraine
Retinal migraine is caused by the blood vessels to the eye suddenly narrowing (constricting), reducing the blood flow to the eye.
It may be triggered by:
stress
smoking
high blood pressure 
oral contraceptive pill
exercise
bending over
high altitude
dehydration
low blood sugar
excessive heat
Afterwards the blood vessels relax, bloodflow resumes and sight returns. Usually there are no abnormalities within the eye and permanent damage to the eye is rare.
Retinal migraine tends to be more common in:
women
people aged under 40
people with a personal or family history of migraines or other headaches
people with an underlying disease – such as lupus, hardening of the arteries, sickle cell disease, epilepsy, antiphospholipid syndrome, and giant cell arteritis
Treatment for retinal migraine
Treatment for retinal migraine usually just involves taking pain relief for any headaches and reducing exposure to anything that might be triggering the retinal migraine.
Your doctor may sometimes prescribe medicine, such as:
aspirin – to reduce pain and inflammation
a beta-blocker – which may help relax blood vessels
a calcium channel blocker – which may help prevent blood vessels constricting
a tricyclic antidepressant – which may help prevent migraine
anti-epileptics – which may help prevent migraine
However, there's still a lack of research about the best way to treat or prevent a retinal migraine.
Possible complications of retinal migraine
There's a small risk that the reduced bloodflow may damage the thin layer at the back of the eye (the retina) and the blood vessels of the eye. This will be monitored in your follow-up appointments. Permanent vision loss is rare.
Page last reviewed: 02 August 2019
Next review due: 02 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright