Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis is a common infection that you can catch from the poo of infected cats, or infected meat. It's usually harmless but can cause serious problems in some people.
Check if you have toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis does not usually cause any symptoms and most people do not realise they've had it.
Some people get flu-like symptoms, such as:
high temperature
aching muscles
tiredness
feeling sick
sore throat
swollen glands
If you do have symptoms, they normally get better on their own within about 6 weeks.
Once you've had toxoplasmosis you cannot catch it again.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you're pregnant or you have a weak immune system and you think you may have toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis is usually harmless, but in rare cases it can lead to serious problems.
You're more at risk if:
you get infected in pregnancy – toxoplasmosis can cause miscarriage. If it spreads to your baby it can cause serious complications, especially if you catch it early in pregnancy
your immune system is weakened – for example, if you have HIV or you're having chemotherapy. The infection may affect your eyes or brain
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
The GP may do blood tests to see if you've been infected. They can also prescribe medicines to treat the infection if necessary.
If you're pregnant and you test positive for toxoplasmosis, the GP can refer you for more tests to see if your baby has been infected. This is very rare.
The baby charity Tommy's has more advice on toxoplasmosis and pregnancy.
How to prevent toxoplasmosis
The parasite that causes toxoplasmosis is found in the poo of infected cats, and in infected meat. You can also catch it from soil that's been contaminated by cat poo.
If you're pregnant or have a weak immune system:
Do
wear gloves while gardening
wash your hands before preparing food and eating
wash hands, knives and chopping boards thoroughly after preparing raw meat
wash fruit and vegetables thoroughly to get rid of any traces of soil
wear gloves while emptying cat litter trays and empty them every day
Don’t
do not eat raw or undercooked meat, or cured meats like salami or parma ham
do not have unpasteurised goats' milk or any products made from it
do not touch or handle pregnant sheep or lambs
Important
You cannot catch toxoplasmosis from stroking a cat, having a cat as a pet or from coming into contact with someone who's got it.
Page last reviewed: 10 September 2020
Next review due: 10 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright