Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Echocardiogram
An echocardiogram, or "echo", is a scan used to look at the heart and nearby blood vessels.
It's a type of ultrasound scan, which means a small probe is used to send out high-frequency sound waves that create echoes when they bounce off different parts of the body.
These echoes are picked up by the probe and turned into a moving image on a monitor while the scan is carried out.
An echocardiogram may be requested by a heart specialist (cardiologist) or any doctor who thinks you might have a problem with your heart, including your GP.
The test will usually be carried out at a hospital or clinic by a cardiologist, cardiac physiologist, or a trained technician called a sonographer.
Although it has a similar name, an echocardiogram is not the same as an electrocardiogram (ECG), which is a test used to check your heart's rhythm and electrical activity.
When an echocardiogram is used
An echocardiogram can help diagnose and monitor certain heart conditions by checking the structure of the heart and surrounding blood vessels, analysing how blood flows through them, and assessing the pumping chambers of the heart.
An echocardiogram can help detect:
damage from a heart attack – where the supply of blood to the heart was suddenly blocked
heart failure – where the heart fails to pump enough blood around the body at the right pressure
congenital heart disease – birth defects that affect the normal workings of the heart
problems with the heart valves – problems affecting the valves that control the flow of blood within the heart
cardiomyopathy – where the heart walls become thickened or enlarged
endocarditis – an infection in the lining of the heart which damages the heart valves
An echocardiogram can also help your doctors decide on the best treatment for these conditions.
How an echocardiogram is carried out
There are several different ways an echocardiogram can be carried out, but most people will have a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE). This procedure is outlined on this page.
You won't usually need to do anything to prepare for the test, unless you're having a transoesophageal echocardiogram.
Transthoracic echocardiogram
Credit:
For a TTE, you'll be asked to remove any clothing covering your upper half before lying down on a bed. You may be offered a hospital gown to cover yourself during the test.
When you're lying down, several small sticky sensors called electrodes will be attached to your chest. These will be connected to a machine that monitors your heart rhythm during the test.
A lubricating gel will be applied to your chest or directly to the ultrasound probe. You'll be asked to lie on your left side and the probe will be moved across your chest.
The probe is attached by a cable to a nearby machine that will display and record the images produced.
You will not hear the sound waves produced by the probe, but you may hear a swishing noise during the scan. This is normal and is just the sound of the blood flow through your heart being picked up by the probe.
The whole procedure will usually take between 15 and 60 minutes, and you'll normally be able to go home shortly afterwards.
Video: your guide to an echocardiogram (echo)
This video explains what to expect when having an echocardiogram.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 April 2021
Media review due: 1 April 2024
Other types of echocardiogram
There are also several other types of echocardiogram that can be carried out:
a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) – where a small probe is passed down the throat into your food pipe (oesophagus) and sometimes into your stomach (your throat will be numbed with local anaesthetic spray and you'll be given a sedative to help you relax); you may need to avoid eating for several hours before this test
a stress echocardiogram – a TTE, but carried out during or just after a period of exercise on a treadmill or exercise bike, or after being given an injection of a medication that makes your heart work harder
a contrast echocardiogram – where a harmless substance called a contrast agent is injected into your bloodstream before an echocardiogram is carried out; this substance shows up clearly on the scan and can help create a better image of your heart
The type of echocardiogram you will have depends on the heart condition being assessed and how detailed the images need to be.
For example, a stress echocardiogram may be recommended if your heart problem is triggered by physical activity, while the more detailed images produced by a TOE may be more useful in helping plan heart surgery.
Video: transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE)
In this video, an expert explains what to expect if you're having a transoesophageal echocardiogram.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 February 2021
Media review due: 1 February 2024
Getting your results
In some cases, it may be possible for the person carrying out the scan to discuss the results with you soon after it's finished.
However, the images from the scan will usually need to be analysed before the results are sent to the doctor who requested the test. Your doctor will then discuss the results with you during your next appointment.
Are there any risks or side effects?
A standard echocardiogram is a simple, painless, safe procedure. There are no side effects from the scan, although the lubricating gel may feel cold and you may experience some minor discomfort when the electrodes are removed from your skin at the end of the test.
Unlike some other tests and scans, such as X-rays and CT scans, no radiation is used during an echocardiogram. However, there are some risks associated with the less common types of echocardiogram.
You may find the TOE procedure uncomfortable and your throat may feel sore for a few hours afterwards. If you have a sedative, you will not be able to drive for 24 hours after the test as you may still feel drowsy from the sedative. There's also a small chance of the probe damaging your throat.
During a stress echocardiogram, you may feel sick and dizzy, and you may experience some chest pain. There's also a small chance of the procedure triggering an irregular heartbeat or heart attack, but you'll be monitored carefully during the test and it will be stopped if there are signs of any problems.
Some people with certain conditions, or who take certain medicines, cannot have the contrast agent used during a contrast echocardiogram. It can cause side effects, but they're usually mild, such as headache. In rare cases, a serious allergic reaction can occur.
Page last reviewed: 28 March 2022
Next review due: 28 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright