Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Tooth decay
Tooth decay is often caused by having too much sugary food and drink and not cleaning your teeth and gums. See a dentist as soon as possible if you think you or your child has tooth decay. Early treatment can help stop it getting worse.
Check if you have tooth decay
Tooth decay may not cause any symptoms at first.
But if it gets worse it can lead to problems, such as a hole forming in the tooth (dental cavity).
If you have a hole in your tooth you may have:
toothache (tooth pain)
sharp pain in your tooth when eating or drinking hot, cold or sweet things (sensitive teeth)
white, brown or black spots on your tooth
Sometimes the tooth or gum can become infected, leading to a painful build-up of pus (dental abscess).
Non-urgent advice:
See a dentist if:
you have problems with your teeth like toothache or a sharp pain in your tooth when eating or drinking
your gums are painful, swollen, or bleed when you brush your teeth
Find a dentist
Get regular dental check-ups
You should have regular dental check-ups even if you do not have any problems. See a dentist if you have not had a check-up for 2 years (or 1 year if you're under 18).
Treatments for tooth decay
Treatment for tooth decay depends on how severe it is.
A dentist can prescribe fluoride treatments like mouthwash or varnish to reverse early tooth decay.
You'll probably need a filling if you have a hole (cavity) in your tooth.
If tooth decay has reached the soft tissue (pulp) in the middle of your tooth, you may need root canal treatment.
Sometimes the affected tooth may need to be removed (extraction).
Cost of dental treatment
Preventing tooth decay
Tooth decay happens when bacteria create a sticky layer called plaque over your teeth. This damages the surface of your teeth over time.
Tooth decay is common in children, so it's important to make sure they're looking after their teeth and gums from an early age.
There are some simple things you can do to keep your and your children's teeth and gums healthy and help prevent tooth decay.
Do
brush your teeth at least twice a day with fluoride toothpaste – spit after brushing, do not rinse
clean in between your teeth every day using floss or interdental brushes
use sugar-free medicines
have regular dental check-ups (your dentist will be able to advise you about how often you need to go)
Don’t
do not have too much sugary food or drink
do not smoke
Information:
Find out more
Children's teeth
Looking after your baby's teeth
How to keep your teeth clean
Sweets, fizzy drinks and bottles
Page last reviewed: 22 March 2022
Next review due: 22 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright