Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Scabies
Scabies is common and anyone can get it. It should be treated quickly to stop it spreading.
Check if it's scabies
The symptoms of scabies are:
intense itching, especially at night
a raised rash or spots
The spots may look red. They are more difficult to see on dark skin, but you should be able to feel them.
Tiny mites lay eggs in the skin, leaving lines with a dot at one end.
Credit:
The rash can appear anywhere, but it often starts between the fingers.
Credit:
The rash may then spread and turn into tiny spots. This may look red on lighter skin.
Credit:
The rash may leave dark spots on the skin. This may look brown or black on darker skin.
Credit:
The scabies rash usually spreads across the whole body, apart from the head.
However, older people, young children and those with a weakened immune system may develop a rash on their head and neck.
When it's not scabies
Many other things can cause itchy skin and rashes in babies and children.
A pharmacist can help with scabies
Scabies is not usually a serious condition, but it does need to be treated.
A pharmacist will recommend a cream or lotion that you apply over your whole body. It's important to read the instructions carefully.
Let the pharmacist know if you are breastfeeding or pregnant.
You'll need to repeat the treatment 1 week later.
Scabies is very infectious, but it can take up to 8 weeks for the rash to appear.
Everyone in your home needs to be treated at the same time, even if they do not have symptoms.
Anyone you have had sexual contact with in the past 8 weeks should also be treated.
Find a pharmacy
Things you can do during treatment to stop scabies spreading
Do
wash all bedding and clothing in the house at 50C or higher on the first day of treatment
put clothing that cannot be washed in a sealed bag for 3 days until the mites die
stop babies and children sucking treatment from their hands by putting socks or mittens on them
Don’t
do not have sex or close physical contact until you have completed the full course of treatment
do not share bedding, clothing or towels with someone with scabies
How long it takes to get rid of scabies
You or your child can go back to work or school 24 hours after the first treatment.
Although the treatment kills the scabies mites quickly, the itching can carry on for a few weeks.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your skin is still itching 4 weeks after treatment has finished
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Scabies can spread easily
Scabies are passed from person to person by skin-to-skin contact. You cannot get scabies from pets.
People who live or work closely together in nurseries, university halls of residence or nursing homes are more at risk.
Scabies and hygiene
Anyone can get scabies. It has nothing to do with poor hygiene.
Complications of scabies
Scratching the rash can cause skin infections like impetigo.
Scabies can make conditions like eczema or psoriasis worse.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 17 November 2020
Next review due: 17 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright