Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Chorionic villus sampling
Contents
Overview
Why it's offered
What happens
Results
Complications
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a test you may be offered during pregnancy to check if your baby has a genetic or chromosomal condition, such as Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome or Patau's syndrome.
It involves removing and testing a small sample of cells from the placenta, the organ linking the mother's blood supply with the unborn baby's.
When CVS is offered
CVS is not routinely offered in pregnancy.
It's only offered if there's a high chance your baby could have a genetic or chromosomal condition.
This could be because:
an antenatal screening test has suggested your baby may be born with a condition, such as Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome or Patau's syndrome
you had a previous pregnancy affected by a genetic condition
you have a family history of a genetic condition, such as sickle cell disease, thalassaemia, cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy
It's important to remember that you do not have to have CVS if it's offered. It's up to you to decide whether you want it.
A midwife or doctor will speak to you about what the test involves, and let you know what the possible benefits are, to help you make a decision.
Find out more about why CVS is offered and deciding whether to have it
How CVS is performed
CVS is usually carried out between the 11th and 14th weeks of pregnancy, although it's sometimes performed later than this if necessary.
During the test, a small sample of cells is removed from the placenta using 1 of 2 methods:
transabdominal CVS – a needle is inserted through your tummy (this is the most common method used)
transcervical CVS – a tube or small forceps (smooth metal instruments that look like tongs) are inserted through the cervix (the neck of the womb)
The test itself takes about 10 minutes, although the whole consultation may take about 30 minutes.
The CVS procedure is usually described as being uncomfortable rather than painful, although you may experience some cramps that are similar to period pains for a few hours afterwards.
Find out more about what happens during CVS
Getting your results
The first results of the test should be available within 3 working days and this will tell you if Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome or Patau's syndrome has been discovered.
If rarer conditions are also being tested for, it can take 2 to 3 weeks or more for the results to come back.
A specialist doctor (obstetrician) or midwife will explain what the screening results mean and talk to you about your options.
There's no cure for most of the conditions found by CVS, so you'll need to consider your options carefully.
You may decide to continue with your pregnancy while gathering information about the condition so you're fully prepared.
Find out more about having a baby that might be born with a genetic condition
Or you may consider ending your pregnancy (having a termination).
Find out more about the results of CVS
Miscarriage and infections.
Before you decide to have CVS, the possible complications will be discussed with you.
CVS can cause miscarriage, the loss of the pregnancy in the first 23 weeks.
The chance of miscarrying after CVS is up to 1 in 100.
You might also get an infection, or need to have CVS again because it was not successful the first time.
Read more about the complications of CVS
What are the alternatives?
An alternative to CVS is a test called amniocentesis.
This is where a small sample of amniotic fluid, the fluid that surrounds the baby in the womb, is removed for testing.
It's usually carried out between the 15th and 18th week of pregnancy, although it can be performed later than this if necessary.
This test can also cause a miscarriage, but your pregnancy will be at a more advanced stage before you can get the results, so you'll have less time to consider your options.
If you're offered tests to look for a genetic or chromosomal condition in your baby, a specialist involved in carrying out the test will be able to discuss the different options with you and help you make a decision.
Page last reviewed: 20 July 2018
Next review due: 20 July 2021
Next
:
Why it's offered
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright