Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP)
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) affects the blood vessels and causes a spotty rash. It's not usually serious, but can sometimes lead to kidney problems.
Check if you or your child has HSP
The main symptom of HSP is a rash of raised red or purple spots. The spots look like small bruises or blood spots.
The rash usually appears on the legs or bottom
Credit:
There may be lots of spots or just a few
Credit:
You may also have pain in your knees, ankles or tummy
Credit:
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you or your child have a rash that does not fade when a glass is pressed against it (glass test) but you do not feel unwell
This could be HSP.
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
a rash does not fade when a glass is pressed against it and you feel very unwell – for example, it's painful to look at bright lights or you have a stiff neck
This could be something serious like meningitis.
See what a rash that does not fade looks like
How to do the glass test
Press the side of a clear glass firmly against the skin.
Check a few times to see if you can still see the spots through the glass.
If you have darker skin, check paler areas like the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet.
What happens if you have HSP
There's no treatment for HSP. It usually passes in a few weeks and you can usually just rest at home until you feel better.
HSP cannot spread to others, so:
your child can return to school or nursery when they feel well enough
you can go back to work as soon as you feel up to it
Treatment to relieve your symptoms
Paracetamol can help ease any pain.
Do not take ibuprofen without speaking to your doctor because it could harm your kidneys.
Regular check-ups for kidney problems
You'll have regular check-ups for 6 to 12 months to check how well your kidneys are working.
You'll usually be asked to provide a sample of pee and have your blood pressure checked at each appointment. This may be done at home, at your GP surgery, or in hospital.
Treatment in hospital
You may need to go into hospital if HSP affects your kidneys.
In hospital, you may be given strong medicines like steroids to help ease your symptoms.
Long lasting effects of HSP
Most people with HSP make a full recovery. Any kidney problems usually get better without treatment.
But sometimes HSP can be severe and last several months, particularly in adults.
There's also a small chance the kidneys could be permanently damaged (chronic kidney disease). This is why it's important to have regular check-ups.
Getting HSP again
You can get HSP more than once. Get medical advice quickly if the symptoms come back.
Page last reviewed: 22 December 2020
Next review due: 22 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright