Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Turner syndrome
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Turner syndrome is a female-only genetic disorder that affects about 1 in every 2,000 baby girls.
A girl with Turner syndrome only has 1 normal X sex chromosome, rather than the usual 2.
This chromosome variation happens randomly when the baby is conceived in the womb. It is not linked to the mother's age.
Read more about the genetic cause of Turner syndrome.
Characteristics of Turner syndrome
Females with Turner syndrome often have a wide range of symptoms and some distinctive characteristics. Almost all girls with Turner syndrome:
are shorter than average
have underdeveloped ovaries, resulting in a lack of monthly periods and infertility
As height and sexual development are the 2 main things affected, Turner syndrome may not be diagnosed until a girl fails to show sexual development associated with puberty, usually between the ages of 8 and 14 years.
Other characteristics of Turner syndrome can vary significantly between individuals.
Read more about the symptoms of Turner syndrome and how Turner syndrome is diagnosed.
Treating Turner syndrome
There's no cure for Turner syndrome but many of the associated symptoms can be treated.
Girls and women with Turner syndrome will need to have their heart, kidneys and reproductive system checked regularly throughout their lives. However, it's usually possible to lead a relatively normal and healthy life.
Life expectancy is slightly reduced, but it can be improved with regular health checks to identify and treat potential problems at an early stage.
Read more about treating Turner syndrome.
National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service
If you or your daughter has Turner syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about you/your daughter on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service (NCARDRS).
The NCARDRS helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat Turner syndrome. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Page last reviewed: 07 July 2021
Next review due: 07 July 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright