Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Botulism
Botulism is a very rare but life-threatening condition caused by toxins produced by Clostridium botulinum bacteria.
These toxins are some of the most powerful known to science. They attack the nervous system (nerves, brain and spinal cord) and cause paralysis (muscle weakness).
Most people will make a full recovery with treatment, but the paralysis can spread to the muscles that control breathing if it isn't treated quickly. This is fatal in around 5 to 10% of cases.
Symptoms of botulism
The time it takes to develop symptoms can vary from a few hours to several days after exposure to the Clostridium botulinum bacteria or their toxins.
Depending on the exact type of botulism, some people initially have symptoms such as feeling sick, being sick (vomiting), stomach cramps, diarrhoea or constipation.
Without treatment, botulism eventually causes paralysis that spreads down the body from the head to the legs.
Symptoms can include:
drooping eyelids
blurred or double vision
facial muscle weakness
difficulty swallowing
slurred speech
breathing difficulties
Affected babies may also have a weak cry, find it difficult to feed, and have a floppy head, neck and limbs.
When to get medical advice
Botulism is a very serious condition that requires immediate medical attention.
Go to your nearest A&E department or immediately dial 999 if you or someone you know has symptoms of botulism.
Treatment is more effective the earlier it's started.
Causes and types of botulism
Clostridium botulinum bacteria are found in soil, dust and river or sea sediments.
The bacteria themselves aren't harmful, but they can produce highly poisonous toxins when deprived of oxygen, such as in closed cans or bottles, stagnant soil or mud, or occasionally, the human body.
There are 3 main types of botulism:
food-borne botulism – when someone eats food containing the toxins because it hasn't been properly canned, preserved or cooked
wound botulism – when a wound becomes infected with the bacteria, usually as a result of injecting illegal drugs like heroin contaminated with the bacteria into muscle rather than a vein
infant botulism – when a baby swallows a resistant form of the bacteria, called a spore, in contaminated soil or food, such as honey (these spores are harmless to older children and adults because the body develops defences against them from about the age of 1)
All these types of botulism are very rare in the UK, but occasional cases do occur.
Treatment for botulism
Botulism needs to be treated in hospital.
The way it's treated depends on the type of botulism, but usually involves:
neutralising the toxins with injections of special antitoxins or antibodies
supporting the functions of the body, such as breathing, until you recover
Treatment won't reverse any paralysis that's already been caused by the toxin, but will stop it getting any worse.
In most people, paralysis that occurred before treatment will gradually improve over the following weeks or months.
Preventing botulism
As a result of high standards of food hygiene in the UK, the chances of getting food-borne botulism from food bought in this country are tiny.
There's a slightly higher risk if you produce your own food, particularly if this involves canning.
But following food hygiene procedures and canning recommendations will reduce any risk.
Don't eat food from bulging or damaged cans, and avoid eating foul-smelling preserved foods, foods stored at the incorrect temperature, and out-of-date foods.
Heroin users should avoid injecting heroin into their muscles. Injecting heroin into a vein or smoking it can reduce the risk of botulism, although not using heroin at all is by far the best course of action.
Find out how to get help to stop using heroin
In many cases of infant botulism, the specific cause isn't identified so it may not always be possible to prevent it.
But you should avoid giving babies under the age of 1 honey as it's been known to contain Clostridium botulinum spores.
Page last reviewed: 26 November 2018
Next review due: 26 November 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright