Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Norovirus (vomiting bug)
Norovirus, also called the "winter vomiting bug", is a stomach bug that causes vomiting and diarrhoea. It can be very unpleasant, but usually goes away in about 2 days.
Check if you have norovirus
The main symptoms of norovirus are:
feeling sick (nausea)
diarrhoea
being sick (vomiting)
You may also have:
a high temperature
a headache
aching arms and legs
The symptoms start suddenly within 1 to 2 days of being infected.
How to treat norovirus yourself
You can usually treat yourself or your child at home.
The most important thing is to rest and have lots of fluids to avoid dehydration.
You will usually start to feel better in 2 to 3 days.
Find out how to treat diarrhoea and vomiting in children and adults
School, nursery or work
Stay off school or work until you have not been sick or had diarrhoea for at least 2 days. This is when you're most infectious.
Do not visit hospitals or care homes during this time.
How norovirus is spread
Norovirus can spread very easily.
You can catch norovirus from:
close contact with someone with norovirus
touching surfaces or objects that have the virus on them, then touching your mouth
eating food that's been prepared or handled by someone with norovirus
Washing your hands frequently with soap and water is the best way to stop it spreading. Alcohol hand gels do not kill norovirus.
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you're worried about a baby under 12 months
your child stops breast or bottle feeding while they're ill
a child under 5 years has signs of dehydration – such as fewer wet nappies
you or your child (over 5 years) still have signs of dehydration after using oral rehydration sachets
you or your child keep being sick and cannot keep fluid down
you or your child have bloody diarrhoea or bleeding from the bottom
you or your child have diarrhoea for more than 7 days or vomiting for more than 2 days
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if you or your child:
vomit blood or have vomit that looks like ground coffee
have green or yellow-green vomit
might have swallowed something poisonous
have a stiff neck and pain when looking at bright lights
have a sudden, severe headache or stomach ache
Find your nearest A&E
What we mean by severe pain
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 17 June 2021
Next review due: 17 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright