Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hereditary neuropathy with pressure palsies (HNPP)
Hereditary neuropathy with pressure palsies (HNPP) is an inherited condition that causes numbness, tingling and muscle weakness in the limbs.
It affects the peripheral nerves, which connect your brain and spinal cord to your muscles and cells that detect touch, pain and temperature.
HNPP can affect anyone. Symptoms usually start in your teenage years or 20s to 30s, although they can develop in childhood or later in life.
Symptoms of HNPP
HNPP most commonly affects your legs, feet, elbows, wrists or hands.
Symptoms can include:
numbness, tingling, muscle weakness
pain in the limbs
loss of sensation in the hand (similar to carpal tunnel syndrome)
muscle weakness, making it difficult to lift the front part of the foot (foot drop) or the wrist (wrist drop)
Symptoms vary in severity, and an episode can last from several minutes to months.
HNPP is not life threatening and most people have mild symptoms. Many people fully recover after an episode and do not have further symptoms.
Sometimes the affected nerve only partially heals, causing long-term nerve symptoms and muscle problems. But even if this happens, symptoms are usually mild and unlikely to lead to a severe disability.
Getting medical advice
See a GP if you have any symptoms of HNPP. The GP will ask about your symptoms, family history, and may carry out a physical examination.
If HNPP is suspected, you may be referred to a neurologist for further tests. You may also be offered a genetic test to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment of HNPP
There's no cure for HNPP, but there are things you can do to help manage your condition.
If you start to experience symptoms, try to avoid:
prolonged sitting with your legs crossed
leaning on your elbows, resting the backs of your arms on a chair, or having someone rest on your arm
repetitive movements of your wrists or elbows
It can also help to:
make a note of what triggers your symptoms so you can change the way you do certain activities
see an occupational therapist for advice on how to carry out day-to-day activities
lose weight if you're overweight
wear ankle or wrist supports, and protective elbow and knee pads, to prevent the nerves getting worse
add a foam mattress topper to your bed to lessen pressure on your affected nerves
If you're suffering from nerve pain, there are medicines you can take.
Causes of HNPP
HNPP is 1 of many inherited conditions that damage the peripheral nerves, such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
It's caused by mutations in the PMP22 gene, which affect the development of myelin, a substance that protects nerve cells.
As the myelin is weak, just the slightest pressure, stretch or repetitive movement on the nerve causes sections of the myelin to be lost, leading to muscle weakness (pressure palsies).
Support for people living with HNNP
If you have HNPP, support is available to help you have the best possible quality of life.
It might help to speak with others who have the same condition, or connect with a charity.
You may find the following links useful: 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth UK
Hereditary Neuropathy Foundation
Information about you
If you have HNPP, your clinical team will advise the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service (NCARDRS).
This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Find out more about the register
Page last reviewed: 21 September 2020
Next review due: 21 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright