Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a condition where your heart suddenly beats much faster than normal. It's not usually serious, but some people may need treatment.
Causes of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)
SVT happens when the electrical system that controls your heart rhythm is not working properly.
This causes your heart to suddenly beat much faster. It can then slow down abruptly.
A normal resting heart rate is 60 to 100 beats per minute (bpm). But with SVT your heart rate suddenly goes above 100bpm. This can happen when you're resting or doing exercise.
Symptoms of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)
Having SVT means your heart suddenly beats faster.
This:
usually lasts for a few minutes, but can sometimes last for several hours
can happen several times a day or once a year – it varies
can be triggered by tiredness, caffeine, alcohol or drugs – but often there's no obvious trigger
can happen at any age, but often starts for the first time in children and young adults – many people have their first symptoms between 25 and 40
You may get no other symptoms, but sometimes people also:
have chest pain
feel weak, breathless or lightheaded
feel tired
feel sick or are sick
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you keep getting a fast heartbeat
It's important to get it checked out. You might need a test, such as an electrocardiogram (ECG), to find out what's going on.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you have been diagnosed with SVT and your episode has lasted longer than 30 minutes
you have sudden shortness of breath with chest pain
You need to go to hospital for treatment immediately.
Things you can do to help with supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)
If your episodes of SVT only last a few minutes and do not bother you, you may not need treatment.
You can make changes to your lifestyle to reduce your chances of having episodes, such as:
cutting down on the amount of caffeine or alcohol you drink
stopping or cutting back on smoking
making sure you get enough rest
Your doctor may also be able to recommend some simple techniques to help stop episodes when they happen.
Treating supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) in hospital
SVT is rarely life threatening. But you may need treatment in hospital if you keep having long episodes.
This may include:
medicines to control the episodes of SVT – given as tablets or through a vein
cardioversion – a small electric shock to the heart to help it get back to a normal rhythm
catheter ablation – a treatment where thin tubes are placed through a vein or artery into your heart to correct the problem with the electrical system; this permanently cures the problem in most patients
Find out more about:
cardioversion: British Heart Foundation
catheter ablation: British Heart Foundation
Page last reviewed: 27 April 2021
Next review due: 27 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright