Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Athlete's foot
Athlete's foot is a common fungal infection that affects the feet. You can usually treat it with creams, sprays or powders from a pharmacy, but it can keep coming back.
Symptoms of athlete's foot
One of the main symptoms of Athlete's foot is itchy white patches between your toes.
Credit:
Credit:
It can also cause sore and flaky patches on your feet.
The skin can look red, but this may be less noticeable on brown or black skin.
Credit:
Credit:
Sometimes the skin on your feet may become cracked or bleed.
Credit:
Other symptoms
Athlete's foot can also affect your soles or sides of your feet. It sometimes causes fluid-filled blisters.
If it's not treated, the infection can spread to your toenails and cause a fungal nail infection.
A pharmacist can help with athlete's foot
Athlete's foot is unlikely to get better on its own, but you can buy antifungal medicines for it from a pharmacy. They usually take a few weeks to work.
Athlete's foot treatments are available as:
creams
sprays
powders
They're not all suitable for everyone – for example, some are only for adults. Always check the packet or ask a pharmacist.
You might need to try a few treatments to find one that works best for you.
Find a pharmacy
How to treat and prevent athlete's foot yourself
You can keep using some pharmacy treatments to stop athlete's foot coming back.
It's also important to keep your feet clean and dry. You do not need to stay off work or school.
Do
dry your feet after washing them, particularly between your toes – dab them dry rather than rubbing them
use a separate towel for your feet and wash it regularly
take your shoes off when at home
wear clean socks every day – cotton socks are best
Don’t
do not scratch affected skin – this can spread it to other parts of your body
do not walk around barefoot – wear flip-flops in places like changing rooms and showers
do not share towels, socks or shoes with other people
do not wear the same pair of shoes for more than 2 days in a row
do not wear shoes that make your feet hot and sweaty
Important
Keep following this advice after finishing treatment to help stop athlete's foot coming back.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
treatments from a pharmacy do not work
you're in a lot of discomfort
your foot or leg is hot, painful and red (the redness may be less noticeable on brown or black skin) – this could be a more serious infection
the infection spreads to other parts of your body such as your hands
you have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
you have a weakened immune system – for example, you have had an organ transplant or are having chemotherapy
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for athlete's foot from a GP
The GP may:
send a small scraping of skin from your feet to a laboratory to check you have athlete's foot
prescribe a steroid cream to use alongside antifungal cream
prescribe antifungal tablets – you might need to take these for several weeks
refer you to a skin specialist (dermatologist) for more tests and treatment if needed
How you get athlete's foot
You can catch athlete's foot from other people with the infection.
You can get it by:
walking barefoot in places where someone else has athlete's foot – especially changing rooms and showers
touching the affected skin of someone with athlete's foot
You're more likely to get it if you have wet or sweaty feet, or if the skin on your feet is damaged.
Page last reviewed: 08 June 2021
Next review due: 08 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright