Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is a dangerous drop in body temperature below 35C (normal body temperature is around 37C). It's a medical emergency that needs to be treated in hospital.
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999
if you think someone has hypothermia and they have any of these:
shivering
pale, cold and dry skin – their skin and lips may be blue
slurred speech
slow breathing
tiredness or confusion
A baby with hypothermia may be:
cold to touch and their skin may be red
floppy
unusually quiet and sleepy and may refuse to feed
What to do while you're waiting for help
Do
move the person indoors or somewhere sheltered as quickly as possible
remove any wet clothing, wrap them in a blanket, sleeping bag or dry towel, making sure their head is covered
give them a warm non-alcoholic drink and some sugary food like chocolate if they're fully awake
keep them awake by talking to them until help arrives
make sure you or someone else stays with them
Don’t
do not use a hot bath, hot water bottle or heat lamp to warm them up
do not rub their arms, legs, feet or hands
do not give them alcohol to drink
These will not help and could make things worse.
Treatment in hospital
Your heart rate will be monitored and you may be given oxygen to help you breathe.
You may also be given warm fluids straight into a vein to help your body warm up.
Treatment in intensive care may be needed if you have severe hypothermia.
Causes of hypothermia
Hypothermia happens when you get too cold and your body temperature drops below 35C.
You can get hypothermia if you:
do not wear enough clothes in cold weather
stay out in the cold too long
fall into cold water
have wet clothes and get cold
live in a cold house – older people living alone are particularly at risk
Page last reviewed: 25 June 2020
Next review due: 25 June 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright