Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Astigmatism
Astigmatism, along with short-sightedness and long-sightedness, is a common cause of blurry vision. It's usually corrected with glasses or contact lenses.
What is astigmatism?
Astigmatism means your eye is shaped more like a rugby ball than a football, so light is focused at more than 1 place in the eye.
This can cause:
blurred vision
headaches
eye strain (you may notice this after concentrating for a long time – on a computer, for example)
Astigmatism normally happens alongside short-sightedness or long-sightedness.
Astigmatism in 1 eye may cause lazy eye (where the vision does not develop properly). It's important this is spotted early so it can be treated.
Regular eye tests for children
Take your child for regular eye tests. Astigmatism, as well as short-sightedness or long-sightedness, may affect their reading or concentration.
Find an optician
Teenagers with astigmatism should also have regular eye tests to check for an eye condition called keratoconus. This causes the cornea to change shape.
Treatments for astigmatism
If astigmatism is affecting your eyesight, there are ways to correct it.
Table showing the pros and cons of treatments for astigmatism
Treatment Pros Cons
Glasses
the cheapest option
may be available free or discounted on the NHS
could get lost or broken
Contact lenses
choice of soft or hard lenses
can be a good choice if you're active
may be free or discounted on the NHS
may not be suitable for everyone
risk of eye infection through poor contact lens hygiene
Laser eye or lens surgery
may be permanent
may be better for people with more severe vision problems
risk of complications during or after surgery
not available on the NHS
can be expensive
some side effects
Page last reviewed: 08 December 2020
Next review due: 08 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright