Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Fungal nail infection
Fungal nail infections are common. They're not serious but they can take a long time to treat.
Check if it's a fungal nail infection
Fungal nail infections usually affect your toenails, but you can get them on your fingernails, too.
Fungal nail infections sometimes start at the edge of the nail.
Credit:
The infection often spreads to the middle of the nail, making the nail discoloured and sometimes thicker in parts.
Credit:
The nail becomes brittle and pieces can break off. Sometimes the whole nail lifts off. This can cause pain and swelling in the skin around the nail.
Credit:
Diabetes advice
If you have diabetes, you should see a foot specialist (podiatrist) because any foot injury or infection can lead to complications of diabetes.
A pharmacist can help with fungal nail infections
Speak to a pharmacist if the look of your nail bothers you or it's painful.
They may suggest:
antifungal nail cream – it can take up to 12 months to cure the infection and does not always work
nail-softening cream – it's used for 2 weeks to soften the nail so the infected part can be scraped off
The infection is cured when you see healthy nail growing back at the base.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP:
if a fungal nail infection:
is severe and treatment has not worked
has spread to other nails
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for a fungal nail infection from a GP
A GP can prescribe antifungal tablets. But before they give you tablets they should take a sample of your nail and have it tested, to find out what type of infection you have.
You may need to take antifungal tablets for up to 6 months.
The tablets can have side effects, including:
headaches
itching
loss of taste
feeling sick and diarrhoea
You cannot take antifungal tablets if you're pregnant or have certain conditions. They can damage your liver.
Badly infected nails sometimes need to be removed. It's a small procedure done while the area is numbed (under local anaesthetic).
Other treatment
Laser treatment uses laser to destroy the fungus.
You'll have to pay for it as it's not covered by the NHS. It can be expensive.
There's little evidence to show it's a long-term cure as most studies only follow patients for 3 months.
Preventing fungal nail infections
Fungal nail infections develop when your feet are constantly warm and damp.
You're more likely to get an infection if you wear trainers for a long time and have hot, sweaty feet.
To prevent fungal nail infections:
Do
treat athlete's foot as soon as possible to avoid it spreading to nails
keep your feet clean and dry
wear clean socks every day
wear flip-flops in showers at the gym or pool
throw out old shoes
Don’t
do not wear shoes that make your feet hot and sweaty
do not share towels
do not wear other people's shoes
do not share nail clippers or scissors
Page last reviewed: 15 February 2021
Next review due: 15 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright