Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Tremor or shaking hands
A tremor is when you're not able to control shaking or trembling in part of your body. See a GP if a tremor is affecting your life as treatment may help to reduce it.
When a tremor is normal
It's normal to have a slight tremor. For example, if you hold your hands or arms out in front of you, they will not be completely still.
Sometimes a tremor becomes more noticeable.
This often happens:
as you get older
when you're stressed, tired, anxious or angry
after drinking caffeine (for example, in tea, coffee or cola) or smoking
if you're very hot or cold
Some medicines and conditions can also cause a tremor. Speak to your GP before you stop taking any prescribed medicine.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have a tremor or shaking hands and:
it's getting worse over time
it's affecting your daily activities
Your doctor will want to make sure the tremor is not caused by another condition. They may also be able to offer treatment.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
Your GP will examine you and ask:
if you have any other symptoms
if you're taking any medicine
about your and your family's medical history – some types of tremor run in families
A mild tremor that is not caused by another condition does not usually need any treatment. Your GP may want to monitor you to make sure it does not get any worse.
Your GP may refer you to a specialist for further tests if your tremor could be a symptom of a condition such as Parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis.
Treating a severe tremor
If you have a tremor that's affecting your life, your GP may prescribe medicine. Medicine will not cure the tremor, but it often helps to reduce the shaking or trembling.
You may need to take medicine all the time, or only when you need it – for example, before a stressful situation that causes your tremor to get worse.
If a tremor is affecting your head or voice, you may be offered injections to block the nerves and relax the muscles.
In rare cases, brain surgery may be an option to treat a severe tremor that is not helped by medicine.
Read more about brain surgery for severe tremor on the National Tremor Foundation (NTF) website
Information:
The NTF also offers support and information on tremor if it's affecting your life.
Page last reviewed: 30 November 2020
Next review due: 30 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright