Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Frozen shoulder
Frozen shoulder means your shoulder is painful and stiff for months, sometimes years. It can be treated with shoulder exercises and painkillers.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have shoulder pain and stiffness that does not go away – pain can be worse at night when sleeping
the pain is so bad it makes it hard to move your arm and shoulder
These are symptoms of frozen shoulder.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for frozen shoulder
Broadly, treatment works in 3 main steps:
Pain relief – avoid movements that cause you pain. Only move your shoulder gently. Use paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain.
Stronger pain and swelling relief – prescribed painkillers. Maybe steroid injections in your shoulder to bring down the swelling.
Getting movement back – shoulder exercises once it's less painful. This can be at home or with a physiotherapist.
You may get a mix of these treatments depending on how painful and stiff your shoulder is.
Stronger pain relief is usually only used for a short time because it can cause side effects.
Physiotherapy for frozen shoulder
Physiotherapy can help you get movement back in your shoulder.
A physiotherapist will decide on the number of sessions you need. The exact number depends on how your shoulder responds to treatment.
The physiotherapist will first check how much movement you have in your shoulders.
Treatments from a physiotherapist include:
stretching exercises
strength exercises
good posture advice
pain relief advice
If you're still in pain after you have finished your sessions, go back to your GP or physiotherapist. They might prescribe more physiotherapy or try another treatment.
Many physiotherapists work at GP surgeries. In some areas, you can ask to see a physiotherapist without seeing a GP first.
You can also get physiotherapy privately.
Find a registered physiotherapist on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website
How long frozen shoulder lasts
Frozen shoulder can take at least 1.5 to 3 years to get better. Sometimes it can be longer.
But the pain and stiffness will usually go away eventually.
How you can ease pain from frozen shoulder yourself
Do
follow any exercises from your GP or physiotherapist
move your shoulder – keeping it still will make the pain worse
try heat packs on your shoulder
Don’t
do not make up your own strenuous exercises – for example, gym equipment can make the pain worse
Putting heat packs on your shoulder
Causes of frozen shoulder
It's often not clear why people get a frozen shoulder.
Frozen shoulder happens when the tissue around your shoulder joint becomes inflamed.
The tissue then gets tighter and shrinks, which causes pain.
Frozen shoulder can happen because:
you had an injury or surgery that keeps you from moving your arm normally
you have diabetes – it's still unclear why this is, but it's important to have your regular diabetes check-ups to catch any problems early
Page last reviewed: 26 April 2021
Next review due: 26 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright