Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Mental health Feelings, symptoms and behaviours Behaviours
Help for suicidal thoughts
If you're feeling like you want to die, it's important to tell someone.
Help and support is available right now if you need it. You do not have to struggle with difficult feelings alone.
Phone a helpline
These free helplines are there to help when you're feeling down or desperate.
Unless it says otherwise, they're open 24 hours a day, every day.
You can also call these helplines for advice if you’re worried about someone else.
Information:
Samaritans – for everyone
Call 116 123
Email jo@samaritans.org
Information:
Campaign Against Living Miserably (CALM)
Call 0800 58 58 58 – 5pm to midnight every day
Visit the webchat page
Information:
Papyrus – for people under 35
Call 0800 068 41 41 – 9am to midnight every day
Text 07860 039967
Email pat@papyrus-uk.org
Information:
Childline – for children and young people under 19
Call 0800 1111 – the number will not show up on your phone bill
Information:
SOS Silence of Suicide – for everyone
Call 0300 1020 505 – 4pm to midnight every day
Email support@sossilenceofsuicide.org
Message a text line
If you do not want to talk to someone over the phone, these text lines are open 24 hours a day, every day.
Information:
Shout Crisis Text Line – for everyone
Text "SHOUT" to 85258
Information:
YoungMinds Crisis Messenger – for people under 19
Text "YM" to 85258
Talk to someone you trust
Let family or friends know what's going on for you. They may be able to offer support and help keep you safe.
There's no right or wrong way to talk about suicidal feelings – starting the conversation is what's important.
Who else you can talk to
If you find it difficult to talk to someone you know, you could:
call a GP – ask for an emergency appointment
call 111 out of hours – they will help you find the support and help you need
contact your mental health crisis team – if you have one
Important
Is your life in danger?
If you have seriously harmed yourself – for example, by taking a drug overdose – or you feel that you may be about to harm yourself, call 999 for an ambulance or go straight to A&E.
Or ask someone else to call 999 or take you to A&E.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and looking after your mental wellbeing:
Every Mind Matters: how to look after your mental wellbeing while staying at home
Mind: Coronavirus and your wellbeing
Tips for coping right now
try not to think about the future – just focus on getting through today
stay away from drugs and alcohol
get yourself to a safe place, like a friend's house
be around other people
do something you usually enjoy, such as spending time with a pet
See more tips from Rethink
Worried about someone else?
If you're worried about someone, try to get them to talk to you. Ask open-ended questions like: "How do you feel about...?"
Do not worry about having the answers. Just listening to what someone has to say and taking it seriously can be more helpful.
See Samaritans' tips on how to support someone you're worried about
Read Rethink's advice on how to support someone who is having suicidal thoughts
Information:
Making a safety plan
If you struggle with suicidal thoughts or are supporting someone else, it may help to make a safety plan to use if you need it:
the Staying Safe website provides information on how to make a safety plan, including video tutorials and online templates to guide you through the process
you can also get information on planning for a mental health crisis from mental health charity Mind
More in Behaviours
Help for suicidal thoughts
Self-harm
Page last reviewed: 7 April 2021
Next review due: 7 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright