Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Itchy bottom
You can often do simple things yourself to ease an itchy bottom (anus). See a GP if the itching does not stop.
How to ease an itchy bottom yourself
Do
gently wash and dry your anus after pooing and before bed
wear loose-fitting cotton underwear
keep cool – avoid clothing and bedding that makes you overheat
have cooler, shorter showers or baths (under 20 minutes)
eat plenty of fibre – such as fruit and vegetables, wholegrain bread, pasta and cereal to avoid runny poo or constipation
Don’t
do not wipe your bottom after pooing – wash it with water or pat it clean with moist toilet paper, then pat dry
do not scratch – if you cannot stop, keep your fingernails short and wear cotton gloves at night
do not strain when you go to the toilet
do not use scented soaps, bubble bath or bath oil
do not use perfumes or powders near your anus
do not eat spicy food or drink lots of alcohol and caffeine – these can make itching worse
A pharmacist can help with an itchy bottom
You can ask the pharmacist if they have a private area where you can speak. They can suggest:
creams and ointments you can buy to help ease itching
medicine and things you should do at home if it's caused by threadworms
Find a pharmacy
Important:
Threadworms
An itchy bottom that's worse at night is often caused by threadworms, especially in children.
Children under 2, and pregnant and breastfeeding women, cannot usually take medicine for threadworms – see a GP, midwife or health visitor instead.
Using creams and ointments for an itchy bottom
Do not use:
more than 1 cream or ointment at the same time
any cream or ointment for longer than a week – they can irritate your skin and make things worse
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have an itchy bottom and:
it does not ease after 3 or 4 days
it keeps coming back
it worries you or makes it hard to sleep
you have itching elsewhere on your body
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will try to work out the cause of your itching. They might need to check your bottom (rectal examination).
Depending on the cause, the GP might:
suggest trying things to ease it yourself for a little longer
prescribe medicine or stronger creams and ointments
Important
Tell the GP immediately if a medicine, cream or ointment makes the itching worse.
Sexual health clinics can help with an itchy bottom
You can also go to a sexual health clinic if you think your itchy bottom might be caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) – for example, if you've had unprotected sex. They can provide the same treatments you would get from a GP.
Many sexual health clinics offer a walk-in service, where you do not need an appointment. They'll often get test results quicker than a GP.
During coronavirus, call a sexual health clinic if you need help or advice. Only go to a clinic if you've been told to.
Find a sexual health clinic
Causes of an itchy bottom
There's not always a clear cause of an itchy bottom. If it gets better quickly, it might have been caused by something that does not need treatment, like sweating a lot in hot weather.
If it lasts longer, you might be able to get an idea of the cause from any other symptoms you have. But do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
A table showing possible causes of symptoms.
Other symptoms with itchy bottom Possible causes
Gets worse at night, worms in poo (they look like small pieces of thread) threadworms, especially in children
Lumps, bright red blood and pain when pooing piles (haemorrhoids)
Poo leaking or pooing you cannot control diarrhoea or incontinence
Sores, swelling or irritation ringworm or a sexually transmitted infection (STI) like genital warts
Itching elsewhere on the body skin condition, such as eczema or psoriasis
While using long-term medicine side effect of steroid creams, some gels and ointments for anal fissure, and peppermint oil
It's unusual for an itchy bottom on its own to be related to something more serious. But rarely, it may be a sign of something like anal or bowel cancer, so it's important to get it checked by a GP.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 28 September 2020
Next review due: 28 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright