Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Rubella (german measles)
Rubella (german measles) is a rare illness that causes a spotty rash. It usually gets better in about 1 week. It can be serious if you get it when you're pregnant.
Check if you or your child have rubella
The main symptom of rubella is a red or pink spotty rash.
The rash takes 2 to 3 weeks to appear after getting rubella.
The rash starts behind the ears and spreads to the head, neck, and body.
Credit:
The rash can be hard to see on dark skin, but might feel rough or bumpy.
Credit:
You might have lumps (swollen glands) in your neck or behind your ears.
Credit:
Rubella can also cause:
aching fingers, wrists or knees
a high temperature of 38C or above
coughs
sneezing and a runny nose
headaches
a sore throat
sore, red eyes
Information:
It's very unlikely to be rubella if you have had both doses of the MMR vaccine or had rubella before.
See other rashes in children and babies
Important:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
At the moment it can be hard to know what to do if your child is unwell. 
It's important to trust your instincts and get medical help if you need it.
Non-urgent advice:
Call a GP if:
you or your child have symptoms of rubella
Rubella can spread to others. It's best to call before you go in. The GP may suggest talking over the phone.
Urgent advice:
Call your midwife, maternity unit, or GP immediately if you're pregnant and have either:
a new rash
been in close contact with someone who has rubella
Rubella can be serious during pregnancy.
How to look after yourself or your child
Rubella usually gets better in about 1 week.
It can help to:
get plenty of rest
drink lots of fluids, like water or squash
take paracetamol or ibuprofen (do not give aspirin to children under 16)
Important
Stay off nursery, school, or work for 5 days after the rash appears.
Also try to avoid close contact with pregnant women.
Rubella is infectious from 1 week before the symptoms start and for 4 days after the rash first appears.
How to avoid spreading or catching rubella
Rubella spreads in coughs and sneezes.
To reduce the risk of spreading or catching it:
Do
wash your hands often with soap and warm water
use tissues when you cough or sneeze
throw used tissues in the bin
Don’t
do not share cutlery, cups, towels, clothes, or bedding
Rubella in pregnancy
Rubella is very rare in pregnancy. But if you get it when you're pregnant, rubella could harm your baby.
It can cause:
loss of the baby (miscarriage)
serious problems after the baby is born – such as problems with their sight, hearing, heart, or brain
The risk is highest if you get rubella early in pregnancy.
There's not thought to be a risk to your baby if you get rubella after week 20 of your pregnancy.
Get vaccinated against rubella
The MMR vaccine can prevent rubella. It also protects you from measles and mumps.
The MMR vaccine is offered to all children in the UK. 2 doses can give lifelong protection against measles, mumps, and rubella.
Ask at your GP surgery if you're not sure you or your child have had the vaccine. They can give it for free on the NHS.
Read more about the MMR vaccine
Page last reviewed: 18 September 2018
Next review due: 18 September 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright