Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Topical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids are a type of steroid medicine applied directly to the skin to reduce inflammation and irritation.
Topical corticosteroids are available in several different forms, including:
creams
lotions
gels
mousses
ointments
tapes and bandages
solutions
They're available in 4 different strengths (potencies):
mild
moderate
potent
very potent
Mild corticosteroids, such as clobetasone, hydrocortisone skin cream and hydrocortisone for piles and itchy bottom, can often be bought over the counter from pharmacies.
Stronger types, such as beclometasone, betamethasone, clobetasol, fluticasone and mometasone, are only available on prescription.
Read about other types of corticosteroids, including tablets, capsules, inhalers and injected corticosteroids.
Corticosteroids should not be confused with anabolic steroids.
Conditions treated with topical corticosteroids
Conditions widely treated with topical corticosteroids include:
eczema – such as atopic eczema
contact dermatitis – which causes symptoms such as dandruff and scaly patches on the skin
psoriasis
Topical corticosteroids cannot cure these conditions, but can help relieve the symptoms.
Who can use topical corticosteroids
Most adults and children can use topical corticosteroids safely, but there are situations when they are not recommended.
They should not be used if:
you have infected skin, unless advised by a doctor
you have certain skin conditions, including rosacea, acne and skin ulcers (open sores)
Most topical corticosteroids are considered safe to use during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, you should wash off any steroid cream applied to your breasts before feeding your baby.
Very potent topical corticosteroids are not usually prescribed for pregnant or breastfeeding women, or for very young children. Sometimes you may be prescribed them under the supervision of a skincare specialist (dermatologist).
How to use topical corticosteroids
Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor, follow the directions on the patient information leaflet that comes with the medicine. This will give details of how much to apply and how often.
Most people only need to use the medicine once or twice a day for 1 to 2 weeks. Occasionally a doctor may suggest using it less frequently over a longer period of time.
The medicine should only be applied to affected areas of skin. Gently smooth a thin layer onto your skin in the direction the hair grows.
If you're using both topical corticosteroids and emollients, you should apply the emollient first. Then wait about 30 minutes before applying the topical corticosteroid.
Fingertip units
Sometimes, the amount of medicine you're advised to use will be given in fingertip units (FTUs).
A FTU (about 500mg) is the amount needed to squeeze a line from the tip of an adult finger to the first crease of the finger. It should be enough to treat an area of skin double the size of the flat of your hand with your fingers together.
The recommended dosage will depend on what part of the body is being treated. This is because the skin is thinner in certain parts of the body and more sensitive to the effects of corticosteroids.
For adults, the recommended FTUs to be applied in a single dose are:
0.5 FTU for genitals
1 FTU for hands, elbows and knees
1.5 FTUs for the feet, including the soles
2.5 FTUs for the face and neck
3 FTUs for the scalp
4 FTUs for a hand and arm together, or the buttocks
8 FTUs for the legs, including the foot, chest, or back
For children, the recommended FTUs will depend on their age. A GP can advise you on this.
Side effects of topical corticosteroids
If you use them correctly, topical corticosteroids rarely have serious side effects.
The most common side effect of topical corticosteroids is a burning or stinging sensation when the medicine is applied. However, this usually improves as your skin gets used to the treatment.
Less common side effects can include:
worsening or speading of a skin infection you already have
inflamed hair follicles (folliculitis)
thinning of the skin, which can make the affected skin more vulnerable to damage; for example, you may bruise more easily
stretch marks, which are likely to be permanent, although they'll probably become less noticeable over time
contact dermatitis, which is a skin irritation caused by a mild allergic reaction to the substances in a particular topical corticosteroid
acne, or worsening of acne
rosacea, which is a condition that causes the face to become red and flushed
changes in skin colour – this is usually more noticeable in people with dark skin
excessive hair growth on the area of skin being treated
Side effects are more likely if you're:
using a more potent corticosteroid
using it for a very long time, or over a large area
The elderly and very young are more vulnerable to side effects.
If potent or very potent topical corticosteroids are used for a long time or over a large area, there's a risk of the medicine being absorbed into the bloodstream and causing internal side effects, such as:
decreased growth in children
Cushing's syndrome
This is not a full list of all the possible side effects. For more information on side effects, see the leaflet that comes with the medicine.
Withdrawal side effects
If you stop using topical corticosteroids after using them continuously for a long time (usually over 12 months in adults), you may have a withdrawal reaction. These can sometimes be severe.
Withdrawal side effects can include:
redness or changes in skin colour (this may not be as noticeable on darker skin)
burning, stinging, itching or peeling of the skin, or oozing, open sores
If you’ve been using topical corticosteroids for a long time, it’s a good idea to ask your doctor to review your treatment.
Reporting side effects
The Yellow Card Scheme allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking. It's run by the medicines safety watchdog called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).
See the Yellow Card Scheme for more information.
Page last reviewed: 15 January 2020
Next review due: 15 January 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright