Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Noise sensitivity (hyperacusis)
Hyperacusis is when everyday sounds seem much louder than they should. Treatment can help. See a GP if you think you have hyperacusis.
Check if you have hyperacusis
You may have hyperacusis if some everyday sounds seem much louder than they should. It can sometimes be painful.
You may be affected by sounds like:
jingling coins
a barking dog
a car engine
someone chewing
a vacuum cleaner
Your sensitivity to noise can affect relationships, school or work and your general wellbeing.
Hyperacusis can affect 1 or both ears. It can come on suddenly or develop over time.
Other types of hearing sensitivity:
if some sounds make you angry, you may have misophonia
if some sounds make you anxious, you may have phonophobia
if your ears have trouble adjusting between quiet and loud sounds, you may have recruitment
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
everyday noises feel too loud
Your GP may refer you to a hearing specialist for further tests and treatment.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for hyperacusis
Hyperacusis can be cured if it's caused by another condition, such as a migraine, head injury or Lyme disease.
If there's no clear cause, you may be offered treatment to help make you less sensitive to everyday sounds.
This could be:
sound therapy to get you used to everyday sounds again, and may involve wearing ear pieces that make white noise
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) to change the way you think about your hyperacusis and reduce anxiety
Things you can try to ease hyperacusis
Do
try some relaxation techniques
Don’t
do not use earplugs or muffs unless you really need to
do not avoid noisy situations, as this will make you become even more sensitive to noise
Information:
To talk to other people with hyperacusis and share your experience, contact:
British Tinnitus Association
Action on Hearing Loss
Causes of hyperacusis
The cause of hyperacusis is unclear. It can appear on its own or with other conditions, like:
tinnitus
a head injury
Ménière's disease
Lyme disease
migraines
Williams syndrome
Find out more about hyperacusis from the British Tinnitus Association.
Page last reviewed: 02 April 2019
Next review due: 02 April 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright