Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Plastic surgery
Contents
Overview
How it's performed
Plastic surgery is used to repair and reconstruct missing or damaged tissue and skin.
The main aim of plastic surgery is to restore the function and appearance of tissue and skin so it's as close to normal as possible.
Plastic surgery is different from cosmetic surgery, which is surgery carried out solely to change a person's appearance to achieve what they feel is a more desirable look.
Read more about cosmetic surgery.
When plastic surgery is used
Plastic surgery can be used to repair:
abnormalities that have existed from birth, such as a cleft lip and palate, webbed fingers, and birthmarks
areas damaged by the removal of cancerous tissue, such as from the face or breast
extensive burns or other serious injuries
Plastic surgery can often help improve a person's self-esteem, confidence and overall quality of life.
Availability of plastic surgery
Reconstructive plastic surgery is usually carried out free of charge by the NHS. But availability varies around the country and is determined by local clinical commissioning groups (CCGs).
Plastic surgeons have extensive training and belong to professional associations, such as the British Association of Plastic Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS).
Check whether a particular surgeon belongs to BAPRAS
Most people are referred to NHS plastic surgeons by their GP or a specialist consultant they see about their condition.
Plastic surgery is also available privately, but it can be very expensive.
It's still a good idea to speak to your GP or specialist first if you're considering private treatment, even if a referral isn't required.
Plastic surgery techniques
Some of the techniques used during plastic surgery are:
skin grafts – where healthy skin from an unaffected area of the body is removed and used to replace lost or damaged skin
skin flap surgery – where a piece of tissue from one part of the body is transferred to another, along with the blood vessels that keep it alive; it's called flap surgery because the healthy tissue usually remains partially attached to the body while it's repositioned
tissue expansion – where surrounding tissue is stretched to enable the body to "grow" extra skin, which can then be used to help reconstruct the nearby area
As well as these techniques, plastic surgeons also use many other methods, such as:
fat transfer or grafting – where fat is removed from one area and inserted in another area, usually to correct unevenness
vacuum closure – where suction is applied to a wound through a sterile piece of foam or gauze to draw out fluid and encourage healing
camouflage make-up or cream
prosthetic devices, such as artificial limbs
Read more about how plastic surgery is performed.
Risks of plastic surgery
As with any type of surgery, plastic surgery has associated risks.
The degree of risk depends on the size of the affected area, the surgeon's level of experience, and the overall health of the person having the procedure.
Some procedures carry specific risks, but general risks include:
pain and discomfort
bleeding
infection
scarring
Contact your surgeon, healthcare team or GP immediately if you have any concerns after surgery, such as unexpected pain, swelling, discharge, or other side effects.
Page last reviewed: 03 August 2021
Next review due: 03 August 2024
Next
:
How it's performed
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright