Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Smelly urine
Smelly pee on its own is not usually a cause for concern. There are often things you can do to help your pee return to normal.
Common causes of smelly pee
Pee is usually clear or pale yellow, with a mild smell.
Things that can often make your pee smell stronger include:
certain types of food and drink, like asparagus or coffee
not drinking enough fluids
some medicines
vitamin B6 supplements
Things you can do yourself
Try these things to help keep your pee clear and smelling mild.
Do
drink plenty of fluids, particularly water, so that you pee regularly during the day and do not feel thirsty
drink more in hot weather and when exercising
Don’t
do not drink a lot of sugary fizzy drinks, coffee or alcohol
do not eat a lot of garlic or asparagus – they contain strong-smelling chemicals that can pass into your pee
do not take more than 10mg of vitamin B6 a day
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have smelly pee and:
you need to pee suddenly, more often than usual, or during the night
you have pain or a burning sensation when peeing
your pee looks cloudy
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Call 111 or ask for an urgent GP appointment if:
you have smelly pee and:
there's blood in your pee
you have lower tummy pain
you have pain in your back, under the ribs
you feel tired and unwell
you feel confused or agitated
you have a very high temperature, or you feel hot and shivery
your temperature is very low
If you have any of these symptoms, you may have a urinary tract infection (UTI).
Less common causes of smelly pee
Other symptoms you have might give you an idea of what's causing your pee to smell. But do not self-diagnose – always see a GP.
Some possible causes of smelly pee and their common symptoms
Symptoms Possible cause
Feeling very thirsty and tired, peeing more than usual, sweet-smelling pee type 2 diabetes
Pain in the side of your tummy (abdomen) or groin, severe pain that comes and goes, feeling sick or being sick, blood in pee kidney stones
Yellow skin and eyes (jaundice), tummy pain, feeling sick or being sick liver failure
Page last reviewed: 18 November 2020
Next review due: 18 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright