Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Dental abscess
A dental abscess is a collection of pus that can form inside the teeth, in the gums or in the bone that holds the teeth in place. It's caused by a bacterial infection.
An abscess at the end of a tooth is called a periapical abscess. An abscess in the gum is called a periodontal abscess.
Dental abscesses are often painful, but not always. In either case, they should be looked at by a dentist.
It's important to get help as soon as possible, as abscesses do not go away on their own.
They can sometimes spread to other parts of the body and make you ill.
Symptoms of a dental abscess
Symptoms of an abscess in your tooth or gum may include:
an intense throbbing pain in the affected tooth or gum that may come on suddenly and gets gradually worse
pain that spreads to your ear, jaw and neck on the same side as the affected tooth or gum
pain that's worse when lying down, which may disturb your sleep
redness and swelling in your face
a tender, discoloured or loose tooth
shiny, red and swollen gums
sensitivity to hot or cold food and drink
bad breath or an unpleasant taste in your mouth
If the infection spreads, you may also develop a high temperature (fever) and feel generally unwell.
In severe cases, you may find it hard to fully open your mouth and have difficulty swallowing or breathing.
What to do if you have a dental abscess
You should see a dentist as soon as possible if you think you have a dental abscess.
Avoid visiting a GP, as there's little they can do to help.
You can get help from:
your registered dentist – if it's out of hours, they should have an answerphone message with details of how to access out-of-hours dental treatment
NHS 111 – who can give you details of dental services in your area
your local A&E – if you're having difficulty breathing or swallowing, or there's swelling around your eye or neck
You may have to pay for emergency NHS dental treatment, depending on your circumstances.
Find out about NHS dental charges
Relieving pain from a dental abscess
While you're waiting to see a dentist, painkillers can help control your pain.
Ibuprofen is the preferred painkiller for dental abscesses, but if you're unable to take it for medical reasons, you can take paracetamol instead.
Aspirin should not be given to children under 16.
If 1 painkiller does not relieve the pain, taking both paracetamol and ibuprofen at the doses shown in the medicine leaflet may help.
This is safe for adults, but not for children under 16.
It may also help to:
avoid hot or cold food and drink if it makes the pain worse
try eating cool, soft foods if possible, using the opposite side of your mouth
use a soft toothbrush and temporarily avoid flossing around the affected tooth
These measures can help relieve your symptoms temporarily, but you should not use them to delay getting help from a dentist.
Treatments for a dental abscess
Dental abscesses are treated by removing the source of the infection and draining away the pus.
Depending on the location of the abscess and how severe the infection is, possible treatments include:
root canal treatment – a procedure to remove the abscess from the root of an affected tooth before filling and sealing it
removing the affected tooth (extraction) – this may be necessary if root canal treatment is not possible
incision and drainage – where a small cut (incision) is made in the gum to drain the abscess (this is usually only a temporary solution and further treatment may be needed)
Local anaesthetic will usually be used to numb your mouth for these procedures.
More extensive operations may be carried out under general anaesthetic, where you're asleep.
Antibiotics are not routinely prescribed for dental abscesses, but may be used if the infection spreads or is particularly severe.
What causes dental abscesses?
Your mouth is full of bacteria, which form a sticky film on your teeth called plaque.
If you do not keep your teeth clean, acids produced by the bacteria in plaque can damage your teeth and gums, leading to tooth decay or gum disease.
The following can increase your chances of developing a dental abscess:
poor oral hygiene – plaque can build-up on your teeth if you do not floss and brush your teeth regularly
consuming lots of sugary or starchy food and drink – these can encourage the growth of bacteria in plaque and may lead to decay that can result in an abscess
an injury or previous surgery to your teeth or gums – bacteria can get into any damaged parts of the teeth or gums
having a weakened immune system – this includes people with certain underlying health conditions, such as diabetes, and those having treatment, including steroid medication or chemotherapy
Preventing dental abscesses
You can reduce your risk of developing dental abscesses by keeping your teeth and gums as healthy as possible.
To do this, you should:
use floss or an interdental brush at least once a day to clean between your teeth and under the gum line
brush your teeth with a fluoride toothpaste twice a day – spending at least 2 minutes each time
avoid rinsing your mouth with water or mouthwash after brushing because this washes the protective toothpaste away – just spit out any excess toothpaste
cut down on sugary and starchy food and drinks – particularly between meals or shortly before going to bed
visit your dentist regularly – your dentist can suggest how often you should have a check-up, based on your oral health
Read more on how to keep your teeth clean and dental check-ups.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 05 February 2019
Next review due: 05 February 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright