Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Typhus
Typhus is an infection spread by lice, fleas or mites. It's found in many countries, but is very rare in the UK. It can be serious, but most people make a full recovery if treated quickly.
How you get typhus
You can catch typhus if you're bitten by infected lice, mites or fleas. These are often found on small animals like mice, rats, cats and squirrels. People can also carry them on their clothes, skin or hair.
Typhus is mainly a problem in parts of Africa, South America and Asia where living standards and hygiene levels are poor, especially in:
overcrowded places like travel hostels
places with lots of bushes and grassland
How to lower the risk of typhus when travelling
There's no vaccine to prevent typhus, but you can reduce the risk of getting infected.
Do
wear insect spray and long-sleeved shirts and trousers
wash and shower regularly
wash and change your clothes regularly
speak to a GP if you're travelling to an area where typhus is a problem
Don’t
do not stay in overcrowded places where there might be lice or fleas, if possible
do not wear clothing or use bedding that might be infected with body lice
do not go near animals like mice, rats, cats and squirrels
Symptoms of typhus
Symptoms of typhus include:
headache
very high temperature (usually around 40C)
feeling sick, being sick and diarrhoea
dry cough
tummy pain
joint pain
backache
a dark spotty rash on your chest that may spread to the rest of your body (apart from your face, palms of your hands and soles of your feet)
Non-urgent advice:
Get medical advice if:
You have symptoms of typhus and:
you've recently returned from abroad
you're travelling abroad
Check your travel insurance for how to get medical help while you're away, or check the health information and advice for the country you're visiting on GOV.UK.
It's important to get diagnosed early so treatment can be started as soon as possible. If typhus is not treated quickly, it can sometimes be life threatening.
Treatment for typhus
You may have a blood test or skin biopsy to check if you have typhus.
Antibiotics are used to treat the infection. They're usually started before you get your test result, as this can take up to a week.
Most people start to feel better within 48 hours of starting treatment. It's important to keep taking your antibiotics until they're finished, even if you feel better.
People with severe typhus may need to be treated in hospital.
Page last reviewed: 05 October 2020
Next review due: 05 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright