Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Pelvic pain
Pelvic pain is felt in the lower part of your tummy. The type of pain varies, and it may be sudden and severe (acute pelvic pain) or last 6 months or longer (chronic pelvic pain).
Symptoms of pelvic pain
Pelvic pain varies. It may affect a small area around your pelvis (your lower tummy) or the whole area.
Types of pelvic pain include:
a sharp, stabbing or burning pain that happens suddenly
a pain that comes on slowly but does not go away
a dull or heavy ache, or feeling of pressure
a twisted or knotted feeling
a cramping or throbbing pain, which may come and go
pain only when you’re doing something, like exercising, having sex, or peeing
Common causes of pelvic pain
There are lots of causes of pelvic pain. It might be caused by an infection or a condition affecting one of the organs in the pelvic area, such as the bowel or bladder.
Common causes include:
constipation or irritable bowel syndrome
urinary tract infections (UTIs)
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Most causes of pelvic pain are not serious. But there a few conditions that cause pelvic pain and need emergency treatment, such as appendicitis and peritonitis.
But do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Pelvic pain in women
Pelvic pain is more common in women and common causes include:
period pain
conditions affecting female reproductive organs, such as an ovarian cyst or endometriosis
pelvic pain in pregnancy
Rarely it could be something more serious, like an ectopic pregnancy, womb cancer or ovarian cancer.
Pelvic pain in men
Pelvic pain can sometimes be caused by conditions affecting the prostate, such as prostatitis.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
pelvic pain does not go away
you have been feeling bloated for a while (about 3 weeks)
you're losing weight without trying to
there's blood in your pee or poo, or an unusual discharge or bleeding from your vagina
you have constipation or diarrhoea that does not go away
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
You have pelvic pain and:
it's severe, getting worse or hurts when you move or touch the area
you find it difficult to pee or poo
you have pain when peeing or need to pee more than usual
you have a very high temperature (you feel hot and shivery)
you are pregnant or may be pregnant
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Treatments for pelvic pain
Any treatment for pelvic pain will depend on the cause.
A GP might suggest treatments such as:
antibiotics
painkillers
physiotherapy, such as exercises for the pelvic floor muscles
hormone treatments
They may refer you for tests or to a specialist if they do not know what is causing your pain.
Page last reviewed: 17 March 2022
Next review due: 17 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright