Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Excessive hair growth (hirsutism)
Hirsutism is where women have thick, dark hair on their face, neck, chest, tummy, lower back, buttocks or thighs. See a GP if it's a problem for you. It might be caused by a medical condition that can be treated.
Causes of hirsutism
Hirsutism is linked to hormones called androgens. It can happen if the level of these hormones increases or if your body becomes more sensitive to them.
The most common cause is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). This is a condition affecting the ovaries that can also cause symptoms such as acne and irregular periods.
Sometimes there's no obvious cause.
Rarely, hirsutism can be caused by:
certain medicines
using anabolic steroids
other hormonal conditions like Cushing's syndrome and acromegaly
a tumour affecting your hormone levels
Information:
If you have lighter, finer hair on your face or body, it's probably not hirsutism. Most women get more of this type of hair as they get older, particularly after the menopause.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you're a woman and you have thick, dark hair on your face, neck, chest, tummy, lower back, buttocks or thighs
The GP will check what's causing the hair growth.
You may have a blood test to measure your hormone levels. A change in your hormone levels is a common cause of hirsutism.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments for hirsutism
If you have hirsutism, your GP may suggest:
losing weight if you're overweight – this can help control hormone levels
things you can do at home to remove or lighten the hair – such as shaving, waxing, plucking, hair removal creams or bleaching
a prescription cream to slow hair growth on your face (eflornithine cream)
taking a contraceptive pill if you've not been through the menopause yet – this can help control hormone levels
If these have not helped after 6 months, your GP may refer you to a specialist. They may recommend other medicines to control your hormone levels.
Longer-lasting hair removal
There are treatments that can get rid of unwanted hair for longer than the things you can do at home. But they're not usually permanent.
They're also not usually available on the NHS and can be expensive.
The 2 main treatments are:
electrolysis – where an electric current is used to stop your hair growing
laser hair removal
Make sure you research these treatments before trying them. They both have risks and the results are not the same for everyone.
Page last reviewed: 15 March 2022
Next review due: 15 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright