Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Head injury and concussion
Most head injuries are not serious, but you should get medical help if you or your child have any symptoms after a head injury. You might have concussion (temporary brain injury) that can last a few weeks.
Urgent advice:
Go to A&E if:
You or your child have had a head injury and have:
been knocked out but have now woken up
vomited (been sick) since the injury
a headache that does not go away with painkillers
a change in behaviour, like being more irritable or losing interest in things around you (especially in children under 5)
been crying more than usual (especially in babies and young children)
problems with memory
been drinking alcohol or taking drugs just before the injury
a blood clotting disorder (like haemophilia) or you take medicine to thin your blood
had brain surgery in the past
You or your child could have concussion. Symptoms usually start within 24 hours, but sometimes may not appear for up to 3 weeks.
You should also go to A&E if you think someone has been injured intentionally.
Find your nearest A&E
Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
Someone has hit their head and has:
been knocked out and has not woken up
difficulty staying awake or keeping their eyes open
a fit (seizure)
fallen from a height more than 1 metre or 5 stairs
problems with their vision or hearing
a black eye without direct injury to the eye
clear fluid coming from their ears or nose
bleeding from their ears or bruising behind their ears
numbness or weakness in part of their body
problems with walking, balance, understanding, speaking or writing
hit their head at speed, such as in a car crash, being hit by a car or bike or a diving accident
a head wound with something inside it or a dent to the head
Also call 999 if you cannot get someone to A&E safely.
Help from NHS 111
If you're not sure what to do, call 111 or get help from 111 online.
NHS 111 can tell you the right place to get help.
How to care for a minor head injury
If you have been sent home from hospital with a minor head injury, or you do not need to go to hospital, you can usually look after yourself or your child at home.
You might have symptoms of concussion, such as a slight headache or feeling sick or dazed, for up to 2 weeks.
Do
hold an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas in a tea towel) to the area regularly for short periods in the first few days to bring down any swelling
rest and avoid stress – you or your child do not need to stay awake if you're tired
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve pain or a headache
make sure an adult stays with you or your child for at least the first 24 hours
Don’t
do not go back to work or school until you're feeling better
do not drive until you feel you have fully recovered
do not play contact sports for at least 3 weeks – children should avoid rough play for a few days
do not take drugs or drink alcohol until you're feeling better
do not take sleeping pills while you're recovering unless a doctor advises you to
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your or your child's symptoms last more than 2 weeks
you're not sure if it's safe for you to drive or return to work, school or sports
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Page last reviewed: 26 October 2021
Next review due: 26 October 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright