Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Lumps
Lumps can appear anywhere on your body. Most lumps are harmless but it's important to see a GP if you're worried or the lump is still there after 2 weeks.
Most lumps are normal
Most people get lumps and growths on their skin at some point. They can be caused by many things.
They can:
be soft or hard to touch
move around
be the size of a pea or a golf ball
be a lump under the skin or a growth that hangs off your skin
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your lump gets bigger
your lump is painful, red or hot
your lump is hard and does not move
your lump lasts more than 2 weeks
a lump grows back after it's been removed
you have a lump in the breast or testicles
you have a swelling on the side of your neck, armpit or groin that does not go down
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will look at your lump. They may be able to tell you what's causing it.
If they're unsure, they might refer you to hospital for tests, such as a biopsy (where a very small sample of the lump is removed and tested) or an ultrasound scan.
Possible causes of lumps
There are lots of possible causes of lumps and growths.
Your symptoms might give you an idea of what’s causing it, but do not self-diagnose.
See a GP if you're worried or the lump is still there after 2 weeks.
Lumps anywhere on the body
Lumps on the armpit, neck or groin
Lumps around the bottom
Lump on the breast or testicle
Lump on the hands
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 21 January 2021
Next review due: 21 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright