Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Ingrown hairs
Ingrown hairs cause red, often itchy bumps where a hair has grown back into the skin. There are things you can do to treat and prevent them and in most cases you will not need to a see a GP for treatment.
Check if you have ingrown hair
Credit:
Ingrown hairs can look like raised, red, itchy spots on the skin. Sometimes you can see a hair trapped under the skin.
You may be more likely to get ingrown hairs if you have coarse or curly hair.
Credit:
Infected ingrown hairs can be painful. You may see pus in the spots.
You are more likely to get ingrown hairs in areas you shave, such as:
face and neck
legs
armpits
chest
back
your pubic hair
Waxing, plucking and threading hair can also lead to ingrown hairs.
If you're not sure it's ingrown hair, find out more about other common skin conditions.
Things you can do to treat and prevent ingrown hair
The best way to prevent ingrown hairs is by not shaving.
If you want to shave, or remove hair in another way, there are things you can do to prevent ingrown hairs and help them get better quicker.
Do
wet your skin with warm water and use shaving gel
shave in the direction the hairs are growing
use as few strokes of the razor as possible
rinse the razor after every stroke
hold a cool, wet cloth to your skin after shaving to reduce irritation
use an exfoliating scrub to help release any trapped hairs
try a different hair removal method, such as hair removal cream
try a long-term way of removing hair, such as laser treatment
Don’t
do not shave too close – leaving some stubble can stop bacteria getting in
do not use a blunt razor – use a new, sharp, single-blade razor every time you shave
do not scratch, pick or squeeze ingrown hairs as this can damage your skin and lead to infection
You can ask a pharmacist about:
creams and lotions to help itching
shaving and hair removal products to help prevent irritation
exfoliating products to help prevent ingrown hairs
a mild antiseptic to help prevent infection
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the ingrown hair or area around it is very painful, hot, red or swollen
your temperature is very high, or you feel hot, shivery or very unwell
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
A GP may be able to treat ingrown hairs by:
freeing the hair using a sterile needle or blade (scalpel)
prescribing a steroid cream to help swelling and irritation
prescribing antibiotic cream or tablets to treat an infection
Page last reviewed: 07 August 2019
Next review due: 07 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright