Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Double vision
Double vision (diplopia) is not usually serious but it's important to get it checked, even if it comes and goes.
Check if you have double vision
Double vision is when you look at 1 object but can see 2 images. It may affect 1 eye or both eyes.
Signs that your child may have problems with their vision include:
narrowing or squinting their eyes to try to see better
covering 1 eye with their hand
turning their head in unusual ways (for example, tilting their head)
looking at you sideways instead of facing forward
Non-urgent advice:
See an optician or GP if:
You think you or your child might have double vision.
Find an optician
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you have eye pain and double vision
you have a severe headache with blurred or double vision
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
What happens at your appointment
An optician or GP can ask about your symptoms and do some simple, painless eye tests. They may refer you to an eye specialist in hospital for tests and treatment.
The optician can also let you know if you need to see a GP instead.
Treating double vision
Your eyecare team or GP can advise you about the best treatment for double vision once they work out the cause.
In some cases, this may be simple treatments such as eye exercises, wearing an eye patch or being prescribed glasses or contact lenses.
Some conditions that cause double vision may require eye surgery to correct the problem.
Causes of double vision
Double vision has many possible causes, depending on whether 1 eye or both eyes are affected.
Information:
Try covering 1 eye at a time to see if your double vision goes away.
If you still have double vision in the eye that is not covered, it's probably only affecting that eye.
Double vision affecting both eyes (binocular)
Double vision affecting both eyes is usually a symptom of a squint.
This is where problems with the eye muscles or nerves cause the eyes to look in slightly different directions.
Squints are more common in children but they do not always cause double vision. An untreated squint in children under 7 causes a lazy eye instead.
Squints in adults are sometimes a sign of a more serious condition.
Double vision affecting 1 eye (monocular)
Double vision affecting 1 eye is less common. It's usually caused by eye problems such as:
dry eyes – where the eyes do not produce enough tears
astigmatism – a common condition where part of the eye is not a perfect shape
cataracts – cloudy patches over the front of the eyes
keratoconus – where the clear outer layer of the eye (cornea) gets thinner and changes shape
Important
You must tell the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) if you're diagnosed with double vision as it could affect your ability to drive.
Find out how to tell the DVLA about double vision (diplopia).
Page last reviewed: 22 October 2020
Next review due: 22 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright