Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Stop smoking treatments
If you want to stop smoking, several different treatments are available from shops, pharmacies and on prescription to help you beat your addiction and reduce withdrawal symptoms.
The best treatment for you will depend on your personal preference, your age, whether you're pregnant or breastfeeding and any medical conditions you have. Speak to your GP or an NHS stop smoking adviser for advice.
Research has shown that all these methods can be effective. Importantly, evidence shows that they are most effective if used alongside support from an NHS stop smoking service.
Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT)
The main reason that people smoke is because they are addicted to nicotine.
NRT is a medication that provides you with a low level of nicotine, without the tar, carbon monoxide and other poisonous chemicals present in tobacco smoke.
It can help reduce unpleasant withdrawal effects, such as bad moods and cravings, which may occur when you stop smoking.
Where to get it and how to use it
NRT can be bought from pharmacies and some shops. It's also available on prescription from a doctor or NHS stop smoking service.
It's available as:
skin patches
chewing gum
inhalators (which look like plastic cigarettes)
tablets, oral strips and lozenges
nasal and mouth spray
Patches release nicotine slowly. Some are worn all the time and some should be taken off at night. Inhalators, gum and sprays act more quickly and may be better for helping with cravings.
There's no evidence that any single type of NRT is more effective than another. But there is good evidence to show that using a combination of NRT is more effective than using a single product.
Often the best way to use NRT is to combine a patch with a faster acting form such as gum, inhalator or nasal spray.
Treatment with NRT usually lasts 8-12 weeks, before you gradually reduce the dose and eventually stop.
Who can use it
Most people are able to use NRT, including:
adults and children over 12 years of age – although children under 18 should not use the lozenges without getting medical advice first
pregnant women – your doctor may suggest NRT if they think it would help you quit; read more about stopping smoking in pregnancy
breastfeeding women – your doctor can advise you how to do this safely
Always read the packet or leaflet before using NRT to check whether it's suitable for you.
Sometimes it may be advisable to get medical advice first, for example if you have kidney or liver problems, or you've recently had a heart attack or stroke.
Possible side effects
Side effects of NRT can include:
skin irritation when using patches
irritation of nose, throat or eyes when using a nasal spray
difficulty sleeping (insomnia), sometimes with vivid dreams
an upset stomach
dizziness
headaches
Any side effects are usually mild. But if they're particularly troublesome, contact your GP as the dose or type of NRT may need to be changed.
Varenicline (Champix)
Varenicline (brand name Champix) is not currently available. It has been withdrawn as a precaution because of an impurity found in the medicine. It's not yet known whether it will be available again in future.
Varenicline is a medicine that works in 2 ways. It reduces cravings for nicotine like NRT, but it also blocks the rewarding and reinforcing effects of smoking. It was only available on prescription.
Speak to your GP or NHS stop smoking adviser who will be able to recommend an alternative treatment.
Bupropion (Zyban)
Bupropion (brand name Zyban) is a medicine originally used to treat depression, but it has since been found to help people quit smoking.
It's not clear exactly how it works, but it's thought to have an effect on the parts of the brain involved in addictive behaviour.
Where to get it and how to use it
Bupropion is only available on prescription, so you'll usually need to see your GP or contact an NHS stop smoking service to get it.
It's taken as 1 to 2 tablets a day. You should start taking it a week or 2 before you try to quit.
A course of treatment usually lasts around 7 to 9 weeks.
Who can use it
Bupropion is safe for most people to take, although there are some situations when it's not recommended.
For example, it's not suitable for:
children under 18 years of age
women who are pregnant or breastfeeding
people with epilepsy, bipolar disorder or eating disorders
Possible side effects 
Side effects of bupropion can include:
dry mouth
difficulty sleeping (insomnia)
headaches
feeling and being sick
constipation
difficulty concentrating
dizziness
Speak to your GP if you experience any troublesome side effects.
Serotonin syndrome
Serotonin syndrome is an uncommon, but potentially serious, set of side effects linked to some medicines.
Serotonin syndrome occurs when the levels of a chemical called serotonin in your brain become too high.
There is a risk of serotonin syndrome if you take other medicines such as:
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
serotonin norepinephrine re-uptake inhibitors (SNRI)
Contact your GP or NHS 111 if you have any symptoms of serotonin syndrome, including:
feeling or being sick
diarrhoea
increased heart rate
feeling agitated
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
E-cigarettes
An e-cigarette is an electronic device that delivers nicotine in a vapour. This allows you to inhale nicotine without most of the harmful effects of smoking, as the vapour contains no tar or carbon monoxide.
Research has found that e-cigarettes can help you give up smoking, so you may want to try them rather than the medications listed above. As with other approaches, they're most effective if used with support from an NHS stop smoking service.
There are no e-cigarettes currently available on prescription.
For now, if you want to use an e-cigarette to help you quit, you'll have to buy one. Costs of e-cigarettes can vary, but generally they're much cheaper than cigarettes.
Read more about e-cigarettes.
Page last reviewed: 17 July 2019
Next review due: 17 July 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright