Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Breast cancer in men
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Breast cancer is often thought of as something that only affects women, but men can get it in rare cases. It grows in the small amount of breast tissue men have behind their nipples.
It usually happens in men over 60, but can very occasionally affect younger men.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: Coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer
Symptoms of breast cancer in men
The symptoms of breast cancer in men include:
a lump in the breast – this is usually hard, painless and does not move around within the breast
the nipple turning inwards
fluid oozing from the nipple (nipple discharge), which may be streaked with blood
a sore or rash around the nipple that does not go away
the nipple or surrounding skin becoming hard, red or swollen
small bumps in the armpit (swollen glands)
Read more about the symptoms of breast cancer in men.
When to see your GP
See your GP if you have:
a lump in your breast
any other worrying symptoms, such as nipple discharge
a history of breast cancer (in men or women) in members of your family and you're worried about your chances of getting it
It's very unlikely you have cancer, but it's best to get your symptoms checked. Your GP will examine your breast and can refer you for tests and scans for breast cancer if needed.
If you do not have symptoms but have a clear family history of breast cancer, your GP may refer you to a genetic specialist to discuss your risk of getting it.
There are some inherited genes that increase your risk of cancer and a blood test can be done to check for these. Read about testing for cancer risk genes.
Treatments for breast cancer in men
The treatment for breast cancer in men depends on how far the cancer has spread.
Possible treatments include:
surgery to remove the affected breast tissue and nipple (mastectomy) and some of the glands in your armpit
radiotherapy – where radiation is used to kill cancer cells
chemotherapy – where cancer medicine is used to kill cancer cells
other medicines that help stop breast cancer growing – including tamoxifen and trastuzumab (Herceptin)
Many men have surgery followed by 1 or more of the other treatments. This can help stop the cancer coming back in the future.
Read more about treatments for breast cancer in men.
Outlook for breast cancer in men
The outlook for breast cancer in men varies depending on how far it has spread by the time it's diagnosed.
It may be possible to cure breast cancer if it's found early.
A cure is much less likely if the cancer is found after it has spread beyond the breast. In these cases, treatment can relieve your symptoms and help you live longer.
Speak to your breast care nurse if you'd like to know more about the outlook for your cancer.
Causes of breast cancer in men
The exact cause of breast cancer in men is not known, but there are some things that increase your risk of getting it.
These include:
genes and family history – inheriting faulty versions of genes called BRCA1 or BRCA2 increases your risk of breast cancer
conditions that can increase the level of oestrogen in the body – including obesity, Klinefelter syndrome and scarring of the liver (cirrhosis)
previous radiotherapy to the chest area
It's not certain that you can do anything to reduce your risk, but eating a balanced diet, losing weight if you're overweight and not drinking too much alcohol may help.
Page last reviewed: 18 March 2020
Next review due: 18 March 2023
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright