Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Metabolic syndrome
Metabolic syndrome is the medical term for a combination of diabetes, high blood pressure (hypertension) and obesity.
It puts you at greater risk of getting coronary heart disease, stroke and other conditions that affect the blood vessels.
On their own, diabetes, high blood pressure and obesity can damage your blood vessels, but having all 3 together is particularly dangerous.
They're very common conditions that are linked, which explains why metabolic syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 3 older adults aged 50 or over in the UK.
Symptoms of metabolic syndrome
Metabolic syndrome may be diagnosed if you have 3 or more of the following:
being very overweight or having too much fat around your waist
high triglyceride levels (fat in the blood) and low levels of HDL (the "good" cholesterol) in your blood, which can lead to atherosclerosis (where arteries become clogged with fatty substances such as cholesterol)
high blood pressure that's consistently 140/90mmHg or higher
an inability to control blood sugar levels (insulin resistance)
Find out more about the health problems linked to metabolic syndrome on Heart UK
Preventing or reversing metabolic syndrome
You can prevent or reverse metabolic syndrome by making lifestyle changes, including:
losing weight
exercising regularly
eating a healthy, balanced diet to keep your blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar levels under control
stopping smoking
cutting down on alcohol
If necessary, a GP may prescribe medicine to help control your blood pressure, blood sugar and cholesterol levels.
Find out more about treating high blood pressure, treating type 2 diabetes and treating high cholesterol.
Page last reviewed: 03 December 2019
Next review due: 03 December 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright