Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Problems swallowing pills
Lots of people find it hard to swallow pills. There are things you can try to make it easier and a pharmacist can offer advice.
How to make it easier to swallow pills
Do
take pills with water – you can take some pills with other drinks or food. Always read the instruction leaflet
lean forward slightly when you swallow
practise swallowing with small sweets or bits of bread – try bigger pieces as swallowing gets easier
Don’t
do not throw pills towards the back of your throat
do not tip your head back too much when you swallow – this can make swallowing more difficult
do not crush pills, open capsules or alter your medicine without getting medical advice – this could stop the medicine working properly
Good pill swallowing techniques
Important
Do not try these techniques if you also have difficulty swallowing food and drink (not just pills), as you might choke. See a pharmacist or GP for advice.
Video: Problems swallowing pills - Lean forward technique
This video shows how to swallow a pill using the "lean forward" technique.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 31 October 2020
Media review due: 31 October 2023
Video: Problems swallowing pills - Pop bottle technique
This video shows how to swallow a pill using the "pop bottle" technique.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 31 October 2020
Media review due: 31 October 2023
A pharmacist can help if you cannot swallow pills
A pharmacist can advise you about:
other versions of your medicine that might be available – for example, you might be able to get it as a liquid or dissolvable tablet
crushing, dividing or opening up tablets and capsules – this should only be done on their advice
Find a pharmacy
Causes of swallowing problems
Problems swallowing pills can be due to:
fear of choking – this can make your throat tense and narrow when you try to swallow
a dry mouth
general swallowing difficulties (dysphagia) – for example, due to a condition such as a stroke
Page last reviewed: 25 September 2020
Next review due: 25 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright