Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Tension headaches
Tension headaches are very common and most people get them. You can treat them yourself with painkillers but see a GP if you have several headaches a week or they're severe.
Check if it's a tension headache
Common symptoms of tension headaches include:
pain on both sides of your head, face or neck
feeling like something is pressing on your head or being tightened around it
the affected area may feel tender and your head may hurt more when touched
You should be able to continue doing daily activities without making the headache worse.
Tension headaches last at least 30 minutes but they can last much longer, sometimes for several days.
Causes of tension headaches
Common causes of tension headaches include:
stress
sleep problems
caffeine
Taking painkillers for headaches too often or for a long time can also cause headaches. These are known as overuse or rebound headaches.
Tension headaches are not a sign of an underlying condition.
How to ease a tension headache
There are some things you can do to treat a tension headache yourself.
Do
use painkillers like paracetamol, aspirin and ibuprofen – paracetamol is the first choice of painkiller if you're pregnant, and children under 16 should not take aspirin
try doing activities to help you relax like exercise, yoga and massage
try changing your sleeping habits if sleep problems like insomnia may be causing your headaches
try using a low, firm pillow and heat or cold packs if you have neck pain and headaches
Don’t
do not have, or cut down on, drinks with caffeine in them like tea, coffee or cola
A pharmacist can help with headaches
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take, if you're not sure which is suitable for you
what to do if you're pregnant – some medicines (like ibuprofen) are not recommended in pregnancy
medicines for sleep problems like insomnia if you're having trouble sleeping and you think it may be causing your headaches
Find a pharmacy
Information:
Find out more about headaches in pregnancy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you get headaches several times a week or they're severe
painkillers and activities to help you relax do not help your headaches
you have a throbbing pain at the front or on 1 side of your head
you feel sick, vomit and find light or noise painful
These can be signs of a different type of headache, such as a migraine or cluster headache.
What we mean by severe pain
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
If you have regular tension headaches, a GP may suggest you keep a headache diary to record details of your headaches like:
how often you get them and how long they last
how painful they are and any other symptoms you have
possible causes
any medicines you take to help
The GP may advise you about taking painkillers for tension headaches, such as when to take medicine and how often you should take it.
You may be referred to a specialist if painkillers and activities like exercise do not help reduce your headaches or if it's not clear what's causing them.
Preventing tension headaches
If you get tension headaches regularly, you may be offered a course of acupuncture.
An antidepressant medicine called amitriptyline is also sometimes recommended to help prevent tension headaches.
You'll be prescribed a low-dose to start with, which may later be increased. The medicine usually needs to be taken for several months before it starts working.
Page last reviewed: 04 March 2022
Next review due: 04 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright