Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Long-sightedness
Contents
Overview
Diagnosis
Treatment
Long-sightedness affects the ability to see nearby objects. You may be able to see distant objects clearly, but closer objects are usually out of focus.
It often affects adults over 40, but can affect people of all ages – including babies and children.
The medical name for long-sightedness is hyperopia or hypermetropia.
Symptoms of long-sightedness
Long-sightedness can affect people in different ways.
Some people only have trouble focusing on nearby objects, while others may struggle to see clearly at any distance.
If you are long-sighted you may:
find that nearby objects appear fuzzy and out of focus, but distant objects are clear
have to squint to see clearly
have tired or strained eyes after activities that involve focusing on nearby objects, such as reading, writing or computer work
experience headaches
Children who are long-sighted often do not have obvious issues with their vision at first. But if left untreated, it can lead to problems such as a squint or lazy eye.
Getting an eye test
If you think you or your child may be long-sighted, you should book an eye test at an opticians. Find an opticians near you.
Having an eye test at least every 2 years is usually recommended, but you can have a test at any point if you have concerns about your vision.
An eye test can confirm whether you're long- or short-sighted, and you can be given a prescription for glasses or contact lenses to correct your vision.
For some people, including children under 16 and those over 60, eye tests are available free of charge on the NHS. Find out more about free NHS eye tests to check if you qualify.
Find out more about diagnosing long-sightedness.
Causes of long-sightedness
Long-sightedness is when the eye does not focus light on the retina (the light-sensitive layer at the back of the eye) properly.
This may be because:
the eyeball is too short
the cornea (transparent layer at the front of the eye) is too flat
the lens inside the eye is unable to focus properly
It's often not clear what causes these problems, but they're rarely a sign of any underlying condition.
Sometimes long-sightedness may be a result of the genes you inherited from your parents, or a result of the lenses in your eyes becoming stiffer and less able to focus as you get older.
Treatments for long-sightedness
Children and young adults with long-sightedness may not need any treatment, as their eyes are often able to adapt to the problem and their vision may not be significantly affected.
Treatment is usually required in older adults, particularly those over 40, as your eyes become less able to adapt as you get older.
There are several ways long-sightedness can be corrected.
The main treatments are:
prescription glasses – these have lenses that are made specifically for you which ensure light is focused onto the back of your eyes correctly
contact lenses – some people prefer these to glasses because they are lightweight and virtually invisible
laser eye surgery – a laser is used to change the shape of the cornea, which may mean you don't need to wear glasses or contact lenses
Glasses are the simplest and safest treatment. Contact lenses and laser eye surgery carry a small risk of complications and are not usually suitable for young children.
Find out more about how long-sightedness is treated.
Page last reviewed: 23 August 2019
Next review due: 23 August 2022
Next
:
Diagnosis
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright