Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), sometimes known as Hughes syndrome, is a disorder of the immune system that causes an increased risk of blood clots.
This means people with APS are at greater risk of developing conditions such as:
deep vein thrombosis (DVT), a blood clot that usually develops in the leg
arterial thrombosis (a clot in an artery), which can cause a stroke or heart attack
blood clots in the brain, leading to problems with balance, mobility, vision, speech and memory
Pregnant women with APS also have an increased risk of having a miscarriage, although the exact reasons for this are uncertain.
APS doesn't always cause noticeable problems, but some people have general symptoms that can be similar to those of multiple sclerosis (a common condition affecting the central nervous system).
Find out more about signs and symptoms of APS
What causes antiphospholipid syndrome?
APS is an autoimmune condition. This means the immune system, which usually protects the body from infection and illness, attacks healthy tissue by mistake.
In APS, the immune system produces abnormal antibodies called antiphospholipid antibodies.
These target proteins attached to fat molecules (phospholipids), which makes the blood more likely to clot.
It's not known what causes the immune system to produce abnormal antibodies.
As with other autoimmune conditions, genetic, hormonal and environmental factors are thought to play a part.
Find out more about the causes of APS
Who's affected
APS can affect people of all ages, including children and babies.
But most people are diagnosed with APS between 20 and 50 years of age, and it affects 3 to 5 times as many women as men.
It's not clear how many people in the UK have the condition.
Diagnosing APS
Diagnosing APS can sometimes be tricky, as some of the symptoms are similar to multiple sclerosis.
This means blood tests to identify the antibodies responsible for APS are essential in diagnosing the condition.
Find out more about diagnosing APS
How antiphospholipid syndrome is treated
Although there's no cure for APS, the risk of developing blood clots can be greatly reduced if it's correctly diagnosed.
An anticoagulant medicine, such as warfarin, or an antiplatelet, such as low-dose aspirin, is usually prescribed.
These reduce the likelihood of unnecessary blood clots forming, but still allow clots to form when you cut yourself.
Treatment with these medications can also improve a pregnant woman's chance of having a successful pregnancy.
With treatment, it's estimated there's about an 80% chance of having a successful pregnancy.
Most people respond well to treatment and can lead normal, healthy lives.
But a small number of people with APS continue to experience blood clots despite extensive treatment.
Find out more about treating APS
Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome
In very rare cases, blood clots can suddenly form throughout the body, resulting in multiple organ failure. This is known as catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome (CAPS).
CAPS requires immediate emergency treatment in hospital with high-dose anticoagulants.
Find out more about catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome (CAPS)
Page last reviewed: 21 August 2018
Next review due: 21 August 2021
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright