Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Typhoid fever
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Vaccination
Typhoid fever is a bacterial infection that can spread throughout the body, affecting many organs. Without prompt treatment, it can cause serious complications and can be fatal.
It's caused by a bacterium called Salmonella typhi, which is related to the bacteria that cause salmonella food poisoning.
Typhoid fever is highly contagious. An infected person can pass the bacteria out of their body in their poo or, less commonly, in their pee.
If someone else eats food or drinks water that's been contaminated with a small amount of infected poo or pee, they can become infected with the bacteria and develop typhoid fever.
Read more about the causes of typhoid fever.
Who's affected?
Typhoid fever is most common in parts of the world that have poor sanitation and limited access to clean water.
Worldwide, children are thought to be most at risk of developing typhoid fever. This may be because their immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) is still developing.
But children with typhoid fever tend to have milder symptoms than adults.
Typhoid fever is uncommon in the UK, with around 300 infections confirmed each year.
Most of these people became infected while visiting relatives in Bangladesh, India or Pakistan. But you're also at risk if you visit Asia, Africa or South America.
Symptoms of typhoid fever
The main symptoms of typhoid fever are:
a persistent high temperature that gradually increases each day
headache
general aches and pains
extreme tiredness (fatigue)
cough
constipation
As the infection progresses, you may lose your appetite, feel sick, and have a tummy ache and diarrhoea. Some people may develop a rash.
If typhoid fever isn't treated, the symptoms will continue to get worse over the following weeks and the risk of developing potentially fatal complications will increase.
Read more about the symptoms of typhoid fever and the complications of typhoid fever.
How typhoid fever is treated
Typhoid fever requires prompt treatment with antibiotics.
If typhoid fever is diagnosed early, the infection is likely to be mild and can usually be treated at home with a 7- to 14-day course of antibiotic tablets.
More severe typhoid fever usually requires admission to hospital so antibiotic injections can be given.
With prompt antibiotic treatment, most people will start to feel better within a few days and serious complications are very rare.
Deaths from typhoid fever are now virtually unheard of in the UK.
If typhoid fever isn't treated, it's estimated that up to 1 in 5 people with the condition will die.
Some of those who survive will have complications caused by the infection.
Read more about treating typhoid fever.
Typhoid fever vaccination
In the UK, 2 vaccines are available that can provide some protection against typhoid fever.
These involve either having a single injection or taking 3 capsules over alternate days.
Vaccination is recommended for anyone planning to travel to parts of the world where typhoid fever is widespread.
The areas with the highest rates of typhoid fever are:
the Indian subcontinent
Africa
south and southeast Asia
South America
It’s important to get vaccinated against typhoid fever if you’re travelling to a high risk area because some strains of the typhoid bacteria are becoming resistant to antibiotics.
Vaccination is particularly important if you're planning to live or work closely with local people.
But as neither vaccine offers 100% protection, it's also important to follow some precautions when travelling. For example, you should only drink bottled or boiled water, and you should avoid foods that could potentially be contaminated.
Read more about the typhoid fever vaccination.
Travel advice
When travelling to a foreign country, it's a good idea to make a list of relevant contact details and telephone numbers in case of an emergency.
You can get travel information and advice for different countries on:
Travel Health Pro: country information
GOV.UK: foreign travel advice
Page last reviewed: 20 September 2021
Next review due: 20 September 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright