Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hearing tests
There are several ways you can get your hearing tested.
How to get an NHS hearing test
You can get a free hearing test on the NHS. A GP may refer you to a hearing specialist (audiologist) who can do the test.
It could take a few weeks to see a specialist so it might be quicker to get tested somewhere else, like at a large pharmacy or opticians. This is often free.
Important
Always see a GP first if:
you also have other symptoms, like earache or discharge – this could be something easily treatable like an earwax build-up or ear infection
you have sudden hearing loss in one ear
you're worried about your child's hearing
Other ways to get a hearing test
Online hearing test
There are simple hearing tests online.
This can tell you if you need to have a face-to-face hearing test.
Pharmacies and opticians
Lots of large pharmacies and opticians can do hearing tests.
The test is often free, but you'll normally have to pay for any treatment you might need (such as hearing aids).
What happens during a hearing test
Page last reviewed: 30 November 2020
Next review due: 30 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright