Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Migraine
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Prevention
A migraine is usually a moderate or severe headache felt as a throbbing pain on 1 side of the head.
Many people also have symptoms such as feeling sick, being sick and increased sensitivity to light or sound.
Migraine is a common health condition, affecting around 1 in every 5 women and around 1 in every 15 men. They usually begin in early adulthood.
There are several types of migraine, including:
migraine with aura – where there are specific warning signs just before the migraine begins, such as seeing flashing lights
migraine without aura – the most common type, where the migraine happens without the specific warning signs
migraine aura without headache, also known as silent migraine – where an aura or other migraine symptoms are experienced, but a headache does not develop
Some people have migraines frequently, up to several times a week. Other people only have a migraine occasionally.
It's possible for years to pass between migraine attacks.
When to get medical advice
You should see a GP if you have frequent or severe migraine symptoms.
Simple painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, can be effective for migraine.
Try not to use the maximum dosage of painkillers on a regular or frequent basis as this could make it harder to treat headaches over time.
You should also make an appointment to see a GP if you have frequent migraines (on more than 5 days a month), even if they can be controlled with medicines, as you may benefit from preventative treatment.
You should call 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone you're with experiences:
paralysis or weakness in 1 or both arms or 1 side of the face
slurred or garbled speech
a sudden agonising headache resulting in a severe pain unlike anything experienced before
headache along with a high temperature (fever), stiff neck, mental confusion, seizures, double vision and a rash
These symptoms may be a sign of a more serious condition, such as a stroke or meningitis, and should be assessed by a doctor as soon as possible.
Causes of migraines
The exact cause of migraines is unknown, although they're thought to be the result of temporary changes in the chemicals, nerves and blood vessels in the brain.
Around half of all people who experience migraines also have a close relative with the condition, suggesting that genes may play a role.
Some people find migraine attacks are associated with certain triggers, which can include:
starting their period
stress
tiredness
certain foods or drinks
Treating migraines
There's no cure for migraines, but a number of treatments are available to help reduce the symptoms.
These include:
painkillers – including over-the-counter medicines like paracetamol and ibuprofen
triptans – medicines that can help reverse the changes in the brain that may cause migraines
anti-emetics – medicines often used to help relieve people's feeling of sickness (nausea) or being sick
During an attack, many people find that sleeping or lying in a darkened room can also help.
Preventing migraines
If you suspect a specific trigger is causing your migraines, such as stress or a certain type of food, avoiding this trigger may help reduce your risk of experiencing migraines.
It may also help to maintain a generally healthy lifestyle, including regular exercise, sleep and meals, as well as ensuring you stay well hydrated and limiting your intake of caffeine and alcohol.
If your migraines are severe or you have tried avoiding possible triggers and are still experiencing symptoms, a GP may prescribe medicines to help prevent further attacks.
Medicines used to prevent migraines include the anti-seizure medicine topiramate and a medicine called propranolol that's usually used to treat high blood pressure. 
It may take several weeks before your migraine symptoms begin to improve.
Outlook
Migraines can severely affect your quality of life and stop you carrying out your normal daily activities.
Some people find they need to stay in bed for days at a time.
But a number of effective treatments are available to reduce the symptoms and prevent further attacks.
Migraine attacks can sometimes get worse over time, but they tend to gradually improve over many years for most people.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 10 May 2019
Next review due: 10 May 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright