Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Travel vaccinations
Contents
Overview
Available vaccines
If you're planning to travel outside the UK, you may need to be vaccinated against some of the serious diseases found in other parts of the world.
Vaccinations are available to protect you against infections such as yellow fever, typhoid and hepatitis A.
In the UK, the NHS routine immunisation (vaccination) schedule protects you against a number of diseases, but does not cover all of the infectious diseases found overseas.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update
Travel vaccinations are being rescheduled as people are currently advised not to travel abroad.
When should I start thinking about the vaccines I need?
If possible, see the GP or a private travel clinic at least 8 weeks before you're due to travel.
Some vaccines need to be given well in advance to allow your body to develop immunity.
And some vaccines involve a number of doses spread over several weeks or months.
You may be more at risk of some diseases, for example, if you're:
travelling in rural areas
backpacking
staying in hostels or camping
on a long trip rather than a package holiday
If you have a pre-existing health problem, this may make you more at risk of infection or complications from a travel-related illness.
Which travel vaccines do I need?
You can find out which vaccinations are necessary or recommended for the areas you'll be visiting on these websites:
Travel Health Pro
NHS Fit for Travel
Some countries require proof of vaccination (for example, for polio or yellow fever vaccination), which must be documented on an International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis (ICVP) before you enter or when you leave a country.
Saudi Arabia requires proof of vaccination against certain types of meningitis for visitors arriving for the Hajj and Umrah pilgrimages.
Even if an ICVP is not required, it's still a good idea to take a record of the vaccinations you have had with you.
Find out more about the vaccines available for travellers abroad
Where do I get my travel vaccines?
First, phone or visit the GP practice or practice nurse to find out whether your existing UK vaccinations are up-to-date.
If you have any records of your vaccinations, let the GP know what you have had previously.
You should also ask if the GP practice is signed up to provide free NHS vaccinations for travel, as not all GP practices are.
If the GP practice does not provide NHS vaccinations for travel, you can try a:
private travel vaccination clinic
pharmacy offering travel healthcare services
The GP or practice nurse may be able to give you general advice about travel vaccinations and travel health, such as protecting yourself from malaria.
They can give you any missing doses of your UK vaccines if you need them.
Not all travel vaccinations are available free on the NHS, even if they're recommended for travel to a certain area.
If the GP practice is signed up to provide NHS travel vaccines, these can be provided to you free of charge.
Other non-NHS travel vaccines may be charged for by the GP.
If the GP practice can give you the travel vaccines you need but they are not available on the NHS, ask for:
written information on what vaccines are needed
the cost of each dose or course
any other charges you may have to pay, such as for some certificates of vaccination
Which travel vaccines are free?
The following travel vaccines are available free on the NHS if your GP practice is signed up to provide vaccination (immunisation) services.
polio (given as a combined diphtheria/tetanus/polio jab)
typhoid
hepatitis A
cholera
These vaccines are free because they protect against diseases thought to represent the greatest risk to public health if they were brought into the country.
Which travel vaccines will I have to pay for?
You'll have to pay for travel vaccinations against:
hepatitis B
Japanese encephalitis
meningitis vaccines
rabies
tick-borne encephalitis
tuberculosis (TB)
yellow fever
Yellow fever vaccines are only available from designated centres.
The cost of travel vaccines that are not available on the NHS will vary, depending on the vaccine and number of doses you need.
It's worth considering this when budgeting for your trip.
Other things to consider
There are other things to consider when planning your travel vaccinations, including:
your age and health – you may be more vulnerable to infection than others; some vaccines cannot be given to people with certain medical conditions
working as an aid worker – you may come into contact with more diseases in a refugee camp or helping after a natural disaster
working in a medical setting – a doctor, nurse or another healthcare worker may require additional vaccinations
contact with animals – you may be more at risk of getting diseases spread by animals, such as rabies
If you're only travelling to countries in northern and central Europe, North America or Australia, you're unlikely to need any vaccinations.
But it's important to check that you're up-to-date with routine vaccinations available on the NHS.
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
Speak to a GP before having any vaccinations if:
you're pregnant
you think you might be pregnant
you're breastfeeding
In many cases, it's unlikely a vaccine given while you're pregnant or breastfeeding will cause problems for the baby.
But the GP will be able to give you further advice about this.
People with immune deficiencies
For some people travelling overseas, vaccination against certain diseases may not be advised.
This may be the case if:
you have a condition that affects your body's immune system, such as HIV or AIDS
you're receiving treatment that affects your immune system, such as chemotherapy
you have recently had a bone marrow or organ transplant
A GP can give you further advice about this.
Non-travel vaccines
As well as getting any travel vaccinations you need, it's also a good opportunity to make sure your other UK vaccinations are up-to-date and have booster vaccines if necessary.
If you have any records of your vaccinations, let the GP know what you have had previously.
People in certain risk groups may be offered extra vaccines.
These include vaccinations against diseases such as:
hepatitis B
tuberculosis (TB)
flu
chickenpox
Read more information on NHS vaccines for adults and children to find out whether you should have any.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 10 December 2018
Next review due: 10 December 2021
Next
:
Available vaccines
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright