Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Nasal polyps
Nasal polyps are painless soft growths inside your nose. They're not usually serious, but they can keep growing and block your nose if not treated.
Check if you have nasal polyps
Symptoms of nasal polyps include:
blocked nose
runny nose
constant need to swallow (post-nasal drip)
reduced sense of smell or taste
nosebleeds
snoring
Nasal polyps can sometimes feel like a cold. But colds tend to clear up within a few days, whereas nasal polyps will not get better unless they're treated.
If your polyps block your sinuses (the air pockets around your nose) you may also have symptoms of sinusitis.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you're worried you may have nasal polyps
you have difficulty breathing
your symptoms are getting worse
you notice changes to your sense of smell
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
A GP should be able to tell if you have nasal polyps by looking inside your nose.
If you have nasal polyps, you'll usually be given steroid nose drops or a spray to shrink the polyps.
You may be given steroid tablets, usually for up to 2 weeks, if:
your polyps are large
nose drops and sprays did not work
Make sure you follow the advice of the GP about how to use your medicine and how long to take it for.
Surgery to remove polyps
If there's no sign of improvement after about 10 weeks, the GP may suggest surgery to remove your polyps.
Most people who have surgery see an improvement, but it's common for polyps to grow back, usually within a few years.
Important
You may need to keep using a steroid nasal spray after surgery to stop the polyps returning quickly.
A pharmacist can help with nasal polyps
After seeing a GP, a pharmacist can recommend:
steroid nasal sprays that do not need a GP prescription
salt water washes (called a saline rinse or nasal douche) to help unblock your nose
Make your own salt water wash
Cause of nasal polyps
It's not clear what causes nasal polyps.
Certain things can increase your risk of getting nasal polyps, like:
asthma
a bad reaction to taking aspirin
Nasal polyps are rare in children.
Page last reviewed: 10 September 2020
Next review due: 10 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright