Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Respiratory tract infections (RTIs)
Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) are infections of parts of the body involved in breathing, such as the sinuses, throat, airways or lungs. Most RTIs get better without treatment, but sometimes you may need to see a GP.
Check if you have an RTI
Symptoms of an RTI include:
a cough – you may bring up mucus (phlegm)
sneezing
a stuffy or runny nose
a sore throat
headaches
muscle aches
breathlessness, tight chest or wheezing
a high temperature
feeling generally unwell
Important:
Could it be coronavirus (COVID-19)?
If you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, it could be COVID-19.
Get advice about symptoms of COVID-19 and what to do
Things you can do yourself
Most RTIs pass within 1 to 2 weeks. You can usually treat your symptoms at home.
Do
get plenty of rest
drink lots of water to loosen any mucus and make it easier to cough up
drink a hot lemon and honey drink to help soothe a cough (not suitable for babies under 1 year old)
gargle with warm salty water if you have a sore throat (children should not try this)
raise your head up while sleeping using extra pillows to make breathing easier and clear your chest of mucus
use painkillers to bring down a fever and help ease a sore throat, headaches and muscle pain
Don’t
do not let children breathe in steam from a bowl of hot water as there's a risk of scalding
do not give aspirin to children under 16
do not smoke – it can make your symptoms worse
How to make a hot lemon and honey drink
How to gargle with salt water
A pharmacist can help with an RTI
A pharmacist can suggest treatments to help relieve your symptoms, such as decongestants and nasal sprays.
You can also buy cough medicines and throat lozenges, although there's little evidence to show they help.
Some treatments contain paracetamol and ibuprofen.
If you're taking these medicines separately, be careful not to take more than the recommended dose.
Certain treatments are not suitable for children, babies and pregnant women. Your pharmacist can advise you about the best treatment for you or your child.
Information:
Call a pharmacy or contact them online before going in person. You can get medicines delivered or ask someone to collect them.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you feel very unwell or your symptoms get worse
you cough up blood or bloodstained mucus
you have had a cough for more than 3 weeks
you're pregnant
you're over 65
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because you have a condition like diabetes or you're having chemotherapy
you have a long-term health condition, such as a heart, lung or kidney condition
You may have pneumonia if your symptoms are severe.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
Treatment will depend on the cause of your RTI:
a virus (like colds) – this usually clears up by itself after a few weeks and antibiotics will not help
bacteria (like pneumonia) – a GP may prescribe antibiotics (make sure you complete the whole course as advised by a GP, even if you start to feel better)
Sometimes a sample of your mucus may need to be tested to see what's causing your RTI.
Use of antibiotics
Antibiotics are only used to treat bacterial infections. They're not used for treating viral infections because they do not work for this type of infection.
How to avoid passing RTIs on to others:
cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze
wash your hands regularly
throw away used tissues immediately
How to avoid getting an RTI
If you keep getting RTIs or you're at a high risk of getting one (for example, because you're over the age of 65 or have a serious long-term health condition), you should:
ask a GP about the annual flu vaccination – find out if you're eligible for the free flu vaccine
ask if you should have the pneumococcal vaccine – this helps prevent pneumonia
stop smoking if you smoke
drink less alcohol
Causes and types of RTIs
RTIs are often spread in the coughs and sneezes of someone with an infection.
There are several different types. They're usually grouped into upper and lower RTIs.
Difference between upper RTIs and lower RTIs
Upper RTIs (sinuses and throat) Lower RTIs (airways and lungs)
Common cold Bronchitis
Sinusitis (sinus infection) Bronchiolitis
Tonsillitis Chest infection
Laryngitis Pneumonia (lung infection)
Flu can be an upper or lower RTI.
Lower RTIs tend to last longer and can be more serious.
Page last reviewed: 28 April 2021
Next review due: 28 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright