Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Chest pain
Most chest pain is not a sign of anything serious but you should get medical advice just in case. Get immediate medical help if you think you're having a heart attack.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
You have sudden chest pain that:
spreads to your arms, back, neck or jaw
makes your chest feel tight or heavy
also started with shortness of breath, sweating and feeling or being sick
lasts more than 15 minutes
You could be having a heart attack. Call 999 immediately as you need immediate treatment in hospital.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have chest pain that comes and goes
you have chest pain that goes away quickly but you're still worried
It's important to get medical advice to make sure it's nothing serious.
Common causes of chest pain
Chest pain has many different causes. In most cases, chest pain is not caused by a heart problem.
Your symptoms might give you an idea of the cause. Don't self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes
Chest pain symptoms Possible cause
Starts after eating, bringing up food or bitter tasting fluids, feeling full and bloated heartburn or indigestion
Starts after chest injury or chest exercise, feels better when resting the muscle chest sprain or strain
Triggered by worries or a stressful situation, heartbeat gets faster, sweating, dizziness anxiety or panic attack
Gets worse when you breathe in and out, coughing up yellow or green mucus, high temperature chest infection or pneumonia
Tingling feeling on skin, skin rash appears that turns into blisters shingles
Chest pain and heart problems
The most common heart problems that cause chest pain include:
pericarditis – which usually causes a sudden, sharp, stabbing pain that gets worse when you breathe deeply or lie down
angina or a heart attack – which have similar symptoms but a heart attack is life-threatening
You're more likely to have heart problems if you're older or know you're at risk of coronary heart disease.
For example, if you:
smoke
are very overweight (obese)
have high blood pressure, diabetes or high cholesterol
have a history of heart attacks or angina in family members under 60 years old
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 14 August 2020
Next review due: 14 August 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright