Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Having an operation (surgery)
Contents
Overview
Seeing a specialist
Before surgery
On the day
After surgery
Getting back to normal
If you're considering having an operation or your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you.
It'll take you through all the steps in the process, from referral to recovery, so you're fully prepared and know what questions to ask at each stage.
Before you start, you'll need to decide which hospital you'd like to be referred to. Find out about NHS hospital services and choosing a hospital.
You can also compare hospitals by following these steps:
find hospitals by surgical procedures
enter your postcode and the name of your operation or select it from the surgical procedures A-Z
you'll be taken to a page listing the hospitals that can carry out the operation
using the columns and drop-down menu, you can compare hospitals based on things such CQC inspection ratings, safety and facilities
Once you have chosen your hospital, in most cases your GP will refer you to see a specialist at this hospital.
Page last reviewed: 03 September 2021
Next review due: 03 September 2024
Next
:
Seeing a specialist
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright