Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Ovarian cyst
Contents
Overview
Causes
Treatment
An ovarian cyst is a fluid-filled sac that develops on an ovary. They're very common and do not usually cause any symptoms.
Most ovarian cysts occur naturally and go away in a few months without needing any treatment.
The ovaries
The ovaries are 2 almond-shaped organs that are part of the female reproductive system. There's 1 on each side of the womb (uterus).
The ovaries have 2 main functions:
to release an egg approximately every 28 days as part of the menstrual cycle
to release the sex hormones oestrogen and progesterone, which play an important role in reproduction
Ovarian cysts may affect both ovaries at the same time, or they may only affect 1.
Symptoms of an ovarian cyst
An ovarian cyst usually only causes symptoms if it splits (ruptures), is very large or blocks the blood supply to the ovaries.
In these cases, you may have:
pelvic pain – this can range from a dull, heavy sensation to a sudden, severe and sharp pain
pain during sex
difficulty emptying your bowels
a frequent need to urinate
heavy periods, irregular periods or lighter periods than normal
bloating and a swollen tummy
feeling very full after only eating a little
difficulty getting pregnant – although fertility is usually unaffected by ovarian cysts
See a GP if you have symptoms of an ovarian cyst.
If you have sudden, severe pelvic pain you should immediately contact either:
a GP or local out-of-hours service
NHS 111
your nearest A&E
Types of ovarian cyst
The 2 main types of ovarian cyst are:
functional ovarian cysts – cysts that develop as part of the menstrual cycle and are usually harmless and short-lived; these are the most common type
pathological ovarian cysts – cysts that form as a result of abnormal cell growth; these are much less common
Ovarian cysts can sometimes also be caused by an underlying condition, such as endometriosis.
The vast majority of ovarian cysts are non-cancerous (benign), although a small number are cancerous (malignant).
Cancerous cysts are more common if you have been through the menopause.
Find out more about the causes of ovarian cysts
Diagnosing ovarian cysts
If a GP thinks you may have an ovarian cyst, you'll probably be referred for an ultrasound scan, carried out by using a probe placed inside your vagina.
If a cyst is identified during the ultrasound scan, you may need to have this monitored with a repeat ultrasound scan in a few weeks, or a GP may refer you to a doctor who specialises in female reproductive health (gynaecologist).
If there's any concern that your cyst could be cancerous, the doctor will also arrange blood tests to look for high levels of chemicals that can indicate ovarian cancer.
But having high levels of these chemicals does not necessarily mean you have cancer, as high levels can also be caused by non-cancerous conditions, such as:
endometriosis
a pelvic infection
fibroids
your period
Treating ovarian cysts
Whether an ovarian cyst needs to be treated will depend on:
its size and appearance
whether you have any symptoms
whether you have been through the menopause
In most cases, the cyst often disappears after a few months. A follow-up ultrasound scan may be used to confirm this.
If you are postmenopausal, there is a slightly higher risk of ovarian cancer. Regular ultrasound scans and blood tests are usually recommended over the course of a year to monitor the cyst.
Surgical treatment to remove the cysts may be needed if they're large, causing symptoms or potentially cancerous.
Ovarian cysts and fertility
Ovarian cysts do not usually prevent you getting pregnant, although they can sometimes make it harder to conceive.
If you need an operation to remove your cysts, your surgeon will aim to preserve your fertility whenever possible.
This may mean removing just the cyst and leaving the ovaries intact, or only removing 1 ovary.
In some cases, surgery to remove both your ovaries may be necessary, in which case you'll no longer produce any eggs.
Make sure you talk to your surgeon about the potential effects on your fertility before your operation.
Video: ovarian cysts
This video explores the symptoms ovarian cysts can cause, the long-term effects, and the treatment options.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 April 2021
Media review due: 1 April 2024
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 10 December 2019
Next review due: 10 December 2022
Next
:
Causes
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright