Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Memory loss (amnesia)
Most people forget things from time to time, but see a GP if you keep having problems with your memory. It could be caused by something that can be treated.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
memory problems are affecting your day-to-day life
It's probably nothing serious, but it's best to get checked because any treatment you need may work better if it's started early.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Concern for a relative
If you're worried about an older relative who's becoming increasingly forgetful, speak to a GP about whether it could be a sign of dementia.
What happens at your appointment
The GP will ask you some questions to try to find the cause of your memory problems.
It might be useful to bring someone else with you who can help describe the problems you're having.
The GP may refer you to a memory specialist for an in-depth assessment. Further tests, such as scans, may also sometimes be needed.
Any treatment that's recommended will depend on the cause of your memory problems.
Causes of memory loss
Memory loss can just be a natural part of getting older.
Sometimes it may be caused by something common and treatable like:
stress
anxiety or depression
sleeping problems (insomnia)
Occasionally, memory loss can be a sign of something more serious, such as dementia.
Do not try to self-diagnose the cause of your memory loss – always see a GP.
Page last reviewed: 09 October 2020
Next review due: 09 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright