Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Heart transplant
Contents
Overview
Who can have one
Waiting list
What happens
Living with
Risks
A heart transplant is an operation to replace a damaged or failing heart with a healthy heart from a donor who's recently died.
It may be recommended when a person's life is at risk because their heart no longer works effectively.
Why heart transplants are carried out
A heart transplant may be considered if you have severe heart failure and medical treatments are not helping.
Conditions that may eventually require a heart transplant include:
coronary heart disease – a build-up of fatty substances in the arteries supplying the heart, which block or interrupt blood flow to the heart
cardiomyopathy – where the walls of the heart have become stretched, thickened or stiff
congenital heart disease – birth defects that affect the normal workings of the heart
If your doctor thinks you might benefit from a heart transplant, you'll need to have an in-depth assessment to check whether you're healthy enough to have one before being placed on a waiting list.
Read more about who can have a heart transplant and being on the heart transplant waiting list.
What happens during a heart transplant
A heart transplant needs to be carried out as soon as possible after a donor heart becomes available.
The procedure is performed under general anaesthetic, where you're asleep.
While it's carried out, a heart-lung bypass machine will be used to keep your blood circulating with oxygen-rich blood.
A cut is made in the middle of the chest. Your own heart is then removed, and the donor heart is connected to the main arteries and veins. The new heart should then begin beating normally.
Find out more about how a heart transplant is performed
Recovering from a heart transplant
You'll usually need to stay in hospital for around 2 or 3 weeks after a heart transplant.
Most people are able to start returning to many of their normal activities within a few months.
Your transplant team can give you advice about how long you may need to avoid certain activities during your recovery.
You'll need to have regular check-ups with your transplant team after the transplant.
You'll also need to take medicines called immunosuppressants for the rest of your life. 
Without these medicines, your body may recognise your new heart as foreign and attack it (rejection).
Find out more about recovering from a heart transplant
Risks of a heart transplant
A heart transplant is a complex and risky procedure.
Possible complications include:
the immune system recognising the transplanted heart as foreign and attacking it (rejection)
the donated heart failing to work properly (graft failure)
narrowing of the arteries supplying the heart (cardiac allograft vasculopathy)
side effects from the immunosuppressant medication, such as an increased vulnerability to infections, weight gain and kidney problems
Many of these problems are treatable, although sometimes another heart transplant may need to be carried out if possible.
Find out more about the risks associated with a heart transplant
Outlook for heart transplants
Most people can eventually return to their normal activities after a heart transplant and experience a significant improvement in their symptoms for many years.
But it's a major operation and some of the complications can be life threatening.
Overall:
80 to 90 in every 100 people will live at least a year
70 to 75 in every 100 people will live at least 5 years
50 in every 100 people will live at least 10 years
Some people have survived for more than 25 years after a heart transplant.
NHS Organ Donor Register
If you're interested in donating your organs after you die, you can join the NHS Organ Donor Register.
Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time.
You can remove yourself from the register at any time and can specify what you're willing to donate.
Page last reviewed: 30 April 2019
Next review due: 30 April 2022
Next
:
Who can have one
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright