Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Blushing
Blushing is a common problem that can be embarrassing and affect your day to day life. There are things you can do to help stop it.
How to help stop yourself blushing
Do
try to relax and do breathing exercises to help reduce stress and anxiety
keep cool by removing a layer of clothing and drinking water
wear make-up that reduces the redness of your skin in stressful situations like an interview or when giving a presentation
Don’t
do not eat spicy foods or drink alcohol or hot drinks if they make you blush
Common causes of blushing
Lots of different things can cause blushing. It's often caused by feeling embarrassed, hot or anxious.
Sometimes other symptoms you have might give you an idea of what's causing it.
Symptoms and possible causes of blushing
Symptoms Possible causes
A red face most of the time, small blood vessels can be seen under your skin, spots Rosacea
Hot flushes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, low mood, reduced sex drive Menopause
Sweating a lot, particularly in your armpits, hands, feet, face and groin Excessive sweating
Swelling in your neck, anxiety and irritability, mood swings, difficulty sleeping, tiredness Overactive thyroid
Some medicines can also cause blushing. Check the side effects of any medicine you're taking to see if blushing or flushing is listed.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your blushing is affecting your everyday life
you think your blushing might be caused by a medical condition or a medicine you're taking
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments from a GP
Treatment for blushing will depend on the cause.
For example, your GP may suggest:
a talking therapy like cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) if your blushing is caused by stress or anxiety
medicines to help reduce anxiety, stop blushing or treat an underlying condition
Very rarely, surgery may be an option if blushing is severe and other treatments have not helped. But this can cause serious and long-lasting side effects.
Page last reviewed: 11 February 2022
Next review due: 11 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright