Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Ewing sarcoma
Ewing sarcoma is a rare type of cancer that affects bones or the tissue around bones.
It mainly affects children and young people, but is also seen in adults. It's more common in males than females.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: Coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer
Symptoms of Ewing sarcoma
Symptoms include:
bone pain – this may get worse over time and may be worse at night
a tender lump or swelling
a high temperature that does not go away
feeling tired all the time
unintentional weight loss
Affected bones may also be weaker and more likely to break. Some people are diagnosed after they have a fracture.
The legs (often around the knee), pelvis, arms, ribs and spine are the main areas affected by Ewing sarcoma.
Tests for Ewing sarcoma
Ewing sarcoma can be difficult to diagnose because it's quite rare and the symptoms can be similar to lots of other conditions.
Several tests may be needed to diagnose the cancer and see where it is in the body.
These tests may include:
an X-ray
blood tests
an MRI scan, a CT scan or a PET scan
a bone scan – after having an injection of a slightly radioactive substance that makes the bones show up clearly
a bone biopsy, where a small sample of bone is removed so it can be checked for signs of cancer and certain genetic changes associated with Ewing sarcoma
Treatments for Ewing sarcoma
Treatment for Ewing sarcoma often involves a combination of:
radiotherapy – where radiation is used to kill cancer cells
chemotherapy – where medicine is used to kill cancer cells
surgery to remove the cancer
As Ewing sarcoma is rare and the treatment complicated, you should be treated by a specialist team. They'll recommend a treatment plan based on where the cancer is and its size.
Talk to your care team about why they've suggested the treatment plan, and ask them to go over the benefits and any risks involved. You may also want to discuss what care you might need afterwards.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy is often used to treat Ewing sarcoma before and after surgery, or it may be used instead of surgery if the cancer cannot be removed safely.
Chemotherapy
Most people with Ewing sarcoma have chemotherapy to shrink the cancer and then surgery to remove as much of it as possible. This is often followed by further chemotherapy to kill any leftover cancer cells.
Surgery
If Ewing sarcoma affects your bones, you'll need surgery at a specialist bone cancer centre.
There are 3 main types of surgery for Ewing sarcoma. Surgery can be used to remove:
the affected bone or tissue – this is called a resection
the bit of bone containing cancer and replacing it with a piece of metal or bone taken from another part of the body – this is called limb-sparing surgery
all or part of an arm or leg – this is called an amputation
If you have an arm or leg amputated, you may need a prosthetic limb and support to help you regain the use of the affected limb.
Outlook for Ewing sarcoma
Ewing sarcoma can spread to other parts of the body quite quickly. The earlier it's diagnosed, the better the chance of treatment being successful.
It can sometimes be cured, but this might not be possible if the cancer has spread.
The cancer can also come back after treatment, so you'll be offered regular check-ups to look for any signs of this. Some people need treatment for many years.
Around 6 out of 10 people with Ewing sarcoma live at least 5 years after being diagnosed. But this can vary and some people live much longer.
Speak to your care team about the chances of your treatment being successful.
More information and support
Being told you or your child has cancer can be very upsetting and overwhelming.
As well as the support from your care team, you may find it useful to get information and advice from charities and support groups.
The main organisations for Ewing sarcoma are:
Sarcoma UK – which has information on Ewing sarcoma as well as general support for people with sarcoma
Bone Cancer Research Trust – which has information on Ewing sarcoma and support for people with bone cancer
Other good sources of information and support for cancer include:
Macmillan Cancer Support
Cancer Research UK
CLIC Sargent
Children's Cancer and Leukaemia Group
There may be a clinical trial suitable for your or your child – ask your doctor for further information. You can also find out about clinical trials for Ewing sarcoma at the Euro Ewing Consortium and Cancer Research UK clinical trials.
Page last reviewed: 06 July 2020
Next review due: 06 July 2020
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright