Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
PMS (premenstrual syndrome)
PMS (premenstrual syndrome) is the name for the symptoms women can experience in the weeks before their period. Most women have PMS at some point. You can get help if it affects your daily life.
Symptoms of PMS
Each woman's symptoms are different and can vary from month to month.
The most common symptoms of PMS include:
mood swings
feeling upset, anxious or irritable
tiredness or trouble sleeping
bloating or tummy pain
breast tenderness
headaches
spotty skin
greasy hair
changes in appetite and sex drive
Things you can do to help
Do
exercise regularly
eat a healthy, balanced diet – you may find that eating frequent smaller meals (every 2-3 hours) suits you better than eating 3 larger meals a day
get plenty of sleep – 7 to 8 hours is recommended
try reducing your stress by doing yoga or meditation
take painkillers such as ibuprofen or paracetamol to ease the pain
keep a diary of your symptoms for at least 2 to 3 menstrual cycles – you can take this to a GP appointment
Don’t
do not smoke
do not drink too much alcohol
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
things you can do to help are not working
your symptoms are affecting your daily life
A GP can advise you on treatments that can help.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treating PMS
As well as changes to your lifestyle, a GP can recommend treatments including:
hormonal medicine – such as the combined contraceptive pill
cognitive behavioural therapy – a talking therapy
antidepressants
dietary supplements
If you still get symptoms after trying these treatments, you may be referred to a specialist.
This could be a gynaecologist, psychiatrist or counsellor.
Complimentary therapies and dietary supplements
Complimentary therapies and dietary supplements may help with PMS, but the evidence of their effectiveness is limited.
They can include:
acupuncture
reflexology
supplements such as vitamin B6, calcium and vitamin D and magnesium (check with a GP or pharmacist if you are also taking medicines before starting to take regular supplements)
Causes of PMS
It's not fully understood why women get PMS.
But it may be because of changes in their hormone levels during the menstrual cycle.
Some women may be more affected by these changes than others.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD)
A small number of women may experience more severe symptoms of PMS known as premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).
Symptoms of PMDD are similar to PMS but are much more intense and can have a much greater negative impact on your daily activities and quality of life.
Symptoms can include:
physical symptoms such as cramps, headaches and joint and muscle pain
behavioural symptoms such as binge eating and problems sleeping
mental and emotional symptoms, such as feeling very anxious, angry, depressed or, in some cases, even suicidal
If you need urgent advice you can:
call a GP and ask for an emergency appointment
call 111 out of hours (they will help you find the support and help you need)
call a helpline, such as the Samaritans (call free on 116 123)
If you feel that you may be about to harm yourself, call 999 for an ambulance or go straight to A&E. Or you can ask someone else to call 999 or take you to A&E.
Read more about getting urgent help for mental health problems.
The exact causes of PMDD are unknown but it has been linked to sensitivity to changes in hormones or certain genetic variations (differences in genes) you can inherit from your parents.
The Mind website has information about PMDD.
Page last reviewed: 09 June 2021
Next review due: 09 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright