Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Bloating
Bloating is where your tummy feels full and uncomfortable. It's very common and there are things you can do to ease it. But see a GP if you feel bloated a lot or it does not go away.
Symptoms of bloating
You may be bloated if:
your tummy feels full or bigger than usual
you have tummy pain or discomfort
your tummy is rumbling or making noises
you're farting more than usual
Causes of bloating
The most common reason for bloating is having a lot of gas in your gut.
This can be caused by some food and drinks, such as some vegetables and fizzy drinks, or by swallowing air when you eat.
It can also be caused by a problem with your digestion, such as:
constipation
a food intolerance
coeliac disease
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Some people feel bloated around the time of their period.
Sometimes, bloating that does not go away can be a sign of something more serious such as ovarian cancer.
How to reduce bloating
Do
exercise regularly to improve your digestion and help prevent bloating – exercise can also help when you're feeling bloated
chew with your mouth closed to avoid swallowing air
drink plenty of water
eat foods high in fibre if constipated
eat smaller, more frequent meals instead of large meals
massage your stomach from right to left to release trapped wind
Don’t
do not drink lots of fizzy drinks, alcohol or caffeine in coffee and tea
do not eat lots of foods that are known to cause gas, like cabbage, beans or lentils
do not eat large meals late at night before bed, or slouch when eating
do not eat lots of processed, sugary, spicy or fatty foods
do not eat food you are intolerant to, if you have a food intolerance
A pharmacist can help with bloating
You can ask a pharmacist about:
laxatives to help treat constipation
medicines like Buscopan to help ease the bloating
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you've been feeling bloated for 3 weeks or more
you feel bloated regularly (more than 12 times a month)
you've tried changing your diet but keep feeling bloated
you have a swelling or lump in your tummy
you have bloating along with being sick, diarrhoea, constipation, weight loss or blood in your poo
you find it difficult to move or do daily activities because you’re bloated
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you have a stomach ache that came on very suddenly or is severe
it hurts when you touch your stomach
you're vomiting blood or your vomit looks like ground coffee
your poo is bloody or black
you cannot pee, poo or fart
you cannot breathe
you have chest pain
Find your nearest A&E
What we mean by severe pain
Treatment for bloating
Treatment for bloating is often not needed. If you need treatment it will depend on the cause.
A GP may:
refer you to an NHS dietitian if general diet tips, such as cutting down on foods that trigger bloating, are not helping
refer you to a specialist for tests to find out what may be causing your bloating
Page last reviewed: 03 March 2022
Next review due: 03 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright