Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Rheumatoid arthritis
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Living with
Complications
Rheumatoid arthritis is a long-term condition that causes pain, swelling and stiffness in the joints. The condition usually affects the hands, feet and wrists.
There may be periods where symptoms become worse, known as flare-ups or flares.
A flare can be difficult to predict, but with treatment it's possible to decrease the number of flares and minimise or prevent long-term damage to the joints.
Some people with rheumatoid arthritis also experience problems in other parts of the body, or more general symptoms such as tiredness and weight loss.
Find out more about the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) advice
If you have rheumatoid arthritis and you're worried about COVID-19, you can get advice about:
COVID-19 and arthritis from Versus Arthritis
COVID-19 and arthritis from the Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Alliance (ARMA)
When to get medical advice
See a GP if you think you have symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, so they can try to identify the underlying cause.
Diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis quickly is important, because early treatment can prevent it getting worse and reduce the risk of joint damage.
Find out more about diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis.
Causes of rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease. This means your immune system (which usually fights infection) attacks the cells that line your joints by mistake, making the joints swollen, stiff and painful.
Over time, this can damage the joints, cartilage and nearby bone.
It's not clear what triggers this problem with the immune system, although you're at an increased risk if:
you are a woman
you have a family history of rheumatoid arthritis
you smoke
Find out more about the causes of rheumatoid arthritis.
Treating rheumatoid arthritis
There's no cure for rheumatoid arthritis. However, early diagnosis and appropriate treatment enables many people with the condition to have periods of months or even years between flares. This can help them to lead full lives and continue regular employment.
The main treatment options include:
medicine that is taken long term to relieve symptoms and slow the progress of the condition
supportive treatments, such as physiotherapy and occupational therapy, to help keep you mobile and manage any problems you have with daily activities
surgery to correct any joint problems that develop
Find out more about treating rheumatoid arthritis.
Depending on how much pain, stiffness or joint damage you have, daily tasks may become difficult or take you longer to do. You may have to adapt the way you do everyday tasks.
Find out more about living with rheumatoid arthritis.
Complications of rheumatoid arthritis
Having rheumatoid arthritis can lead to several other conditions that may cause additional symptoms and can sometimes be life threatening.
Possible complications include:
carpal tunnel syndrome
inflammation of other areas of the body (such as the lungs, heart and eyes)
an increased risk of heart attack and stroke
Making sure that rheumatoid arthritis is well controlled can help to reduce your risk of these complications.
Find out more about complications of rheumatoid arthritis.
Video: rheumatoid arthritis
In this video, a rheumatologist describes the effects of rheumatoid arthritis and the symptoms and treatments.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 21 April 2020
Media review due: 21 April 2023
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 28 August 2019
Next review due: 28 August 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright