Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Hives
Hives rashes usually settle down within a few minutes to a few days. You can often treat hives yourself.
Check if you have hives
Hives can appear as raised patches of skin.
Credit:
The rash can be red. Redness can be harder to see on brown or black skin.
Credit:
The rash can also be raised spots.
Credit:
Hives can be different sizes and shapes and appear anywhere on the body in both adults and children.
The rash is often itchy and sometimes feels like it's stinging or burning.
If you're not sure it's hives
Look at other rashes in babies and children.
A pharmacist can help with hives
A pharmacist can give you advice about antihistamine tablets to help a hives rash.
Tell the pharmacist if you have a long-term condition – you might not be able to take antihistamines.
They also may not be suitable for young children.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the symptoms do not improve after 2 days
you're worried about your child's hives
the rash is spreading
hives keeps coming back – you may be allergic to something
you also have a high temperature and feel generally unwell
you also have swelling under the skin – this might be angioedema
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E now if:
you're wheezing
you get tightness in your chest or throat
you have trouble breathing or talking
your mouth, face, lips, tongue or throat start swelling
You could be having a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) and may need immediate treatment in hospital.
Treatment for hives from a GP
A GP may prescribe menthol cream, stronger antihistamines or steroid tablets.
If hives does not go away with treatment, you may be referred to a skin specialist (dermatologist).
You cannot always prevent hives
You get hives when something causes high levels of histamine and other chemicals to be released in your skin. This is known as a trigger.
Triggers can include:
eating certain foods
contact with certain plants, animals, chemicals and latex
cold – such as cold water or wind
hot, sweaty skin – from exercise, emotional stress or eating spicy food
a reaction to a medicine, insect bite or sting
scratching or pressing on your skin – such as wearing itchy or tight clothing
an infection
a problem with your immune system
water or sunlight – but this is rare
Try to find out what triggers hives for you, so you can avoid those triggers. This may help prevent an episode of hives.
Page last reviewed: 13 April 2021
Next review due: 13 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright