Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) – sometimes known as "cot death" – is the sudden, unexpected and unexplained death of an apparently healthy baby.
In the UK, around 200 babies die suddenly and unexpectedly every year. This statistic may sound alarming, but SIDS is rare and the risk of your baby dying from it is low.
Most deaths happen during the first 6 months of a baby's life. Infants born prematurely or with a low birthweight are at greater risk. SIDS also tends to be slightly more common in baby boys.
SIDS usually occurs when a baby is asleep, although it can occasionally happen while they're awake.
Parents can reduce the risk of SIDS by not smoking while pregnant or after the baby is born, and always placing the baby on their back when they sleep.
Find out how to stop smoking.
What causes SIDS?
The exact cause of SIDS is unknown, but it's thought to be down to a combination of factors.
Experts believe SIDS occurs at a particular stage in a baby's development and that it affects babies vulnerable to certain environmental stresses.
This vulnerability may be caused by being born prematurely or having a low birthweight, or because of other reasons that have not been identified yet. 
Environmental stresses could include tobacco smoke, getting tangled in bedding, a minor illness or a breathing obstruction. There's also an association between co-sleeping (sleeping with your baby on a bed, sofa or chair) and SIDS.
Babies who die of SIDS are thought to have problems in the way they respond to these stresses and how they regulate their heart rate, breathing and temperature.
Although the cause of SIDS is not fully understood, there are a number of things you can do to reduce the risk.
What can I do to help prevent SIDS?
Do
always place your baby on their back to sleep
place your baby in the "feet to foot" position – with their feet touching the end of the cot, Moses basket, or pram
keep your baby's head uncovered – their blanket should be tucked in no higher than their shoulders
let your baby sleep in a cot or Moses basket in the same room as you for the first 6 months
use a mattress that's firm, flat, waterproof and in good condition
breastfeed your baby, if you can – see benefits of breastfeeding for more information
make sure you use a sling or baby-carrier safely – The Lullaby Trust has more information
Don’t
do not smoke during pregnancy or let anyone smoke in the same room as your baby – both before and after birth
do not sleep on a bed, sofa or armchair with your baby
do not share a bed with your baby if you or your partner smoke or take drugs, have recently drunk alcohol or if your baby was born prematurely or weighed under 2.5kg when they were born
do not let your baby get too hot or too cold – a room temperature of 16C to 20C, with light bedding or a lightweight baby sleeping bag, will provide a comfortable sleeping environment for your baby
Read more about reducing the risk of SIDS.
Seeking medical advice if your baby is unwell
Babies often have minor illnesses that you do not need to worry about. Give your baby plenty of fluids to drink and do not let them get too hot.
If you're worried about your baby at any point, see your GP or call NHS 111 for advice.
Read more about spotting signs of serious illness in children.
Immediate action required:
Dial 999 for an ambulance if your baby:
stops breathing or turns blue
is struggling for breath
is unconscious or seems unaware of what's going on
will not wake up
has a fit for the first time, even if they seem to recover
Support services
If a baby dies suddenly and unexpectedly, there will need to be an investigation into how and why they died. A post-mortem examination will usually be necessary, which can be very distressing for the family.
The police and healthcare professionals work closely to investigate unexpected infant deaths and ensure the family is supported. They should be able to put you in touch with local sources of help and support.
Many people find talking to others who have had similar experiences helps them to cope with their bereavement.
The Lullaby Trust provides advice and support for bereaved families. Specially trained advisers are available on its helpline – the number is 0808 802 6868 and it's open Monday to Friday (10am to 5pm), and at weekends and public holidays (6pm to 10pm).
You can also email support@lullabytrust.org.uk or visit the Lullaby Trust website for further information and support.
Read more about bereavement.
Page last reviewed: 27 October 2021
Next review due: 27 October 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright