Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Ileostomy
Contents
Overview
Why it's used
How it's performed
Recovery
Complications
Living with an ileostomy
Reversal
An ileostomy is where the small bowel (small intestine) is diverted through an opening in the tummy (abdomen).
The opening is known as a stoma. A special bag is placed over the stoma to collect waste products that usually pass through the colon (large intestine) and out of the body through the rectum and back passage (anus).
Stoma in a person's tummy
Credit:
Ileostomy procedures are relatively common in the UK.
When is an ileostomy needed?
Ileostomies are formed to either temporarily or permanently stop digestive waste passing through the full length of the small intestine or colon.
There are a number of reasons why this may be necessary, including:
to allow the small intestine or colon to heal after it's been operated on – for example, if a section of bowel has been removed to treat bowel cancer
to relieve inflammation of the colon in people with Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis
to allow for complex surgery to be carried out on the anus or rectum
Find out more about why ileostomy procedures are carried out
The ileostomy procedure
Before an ileostomy is formed, you'll normally see a specialist stoma nurse to discuss exactly where you'd like your stoma to be (usually somewhere on the right-hand side of the abdomen) and to talk about living with a stoma.
There are 2 main types of ileostomy:
loop ileostomy – where a loop of small intestine is pulled out through a cut (incision) in your abdomen, before being opened up and stitched to the skin to form a stoma
end ileostomy – where the ileum is separated from the colon and is brought out through the abdomen to form a stoma
Alternatively, it's sometimes possible for an internal pouch to be created that's connected to your anus (ileo-anal pouch).
This means there's no stoma and stools are passed out of your back passage in a similar way to normal.
End ileostomies and ileo-anal pouches are usually permanent. Loop ileostomies are usually intended to be temporary and can be reversed during an operation at a later date.
Read more about how an ileostomy is formed and reversing an ileostomy.
After surgery
You may need to stay in hospital for up to 2 weeks after an ileostomy operation.
During this time you'll be taught how to look after your stoma by a specialist stoma nurse.
Recovering from the procedure can be challenging. Many people experience short-term physical and psychological problems, ranging from skin irritation around the stoma to feelings of anxiety and self-consciousness.
But with practise and support from a nurse with training in stoma care, many people adjust and often find their quality of life improves after surgery.
This is especially true if they have been living with a condition like Crohn's disease for years.
Read more about recovering from an ileostomy procedure and living with an ileostomy.
Complications
As with any surgical procedure, having an ileostomy carries a risk of complications.
Some of the problems people with an ileostomy experience include:
a bowel obstruction – where the output of digestive waste is blocked
vitamin B12 deficiency – caused by the removal of part of the intestine that absorbs vitamin B12
stoma problems – such as a change in the size of the stoma making it difficult to attach the external bag
Find out more about the risks of having an ileostomy
Page last reviewed: 25 February 2019
Next review due: 25 February 2022
Next
:
Why it's used
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright