Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Staph infection
Staph infections are caused by bacteria called staphylococcus. They most often affect the skin. They can go away on their own, but sometimes they need to be treated with antibiotics.
Check if you have a staph skin infection
Symptoms of a staph skin infection can include:
A painful red lump or bump on the skin
Hot, red and swollen skin
Sores, crusts or blisters
Sore, red eyelids or eyes
Information:
Staph bacteria can also cause more serious infections, like blood poisoning and toxic shock syndrome. These are much less common than skin infections.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you think you have a staph skin infection and:
it's getting worse or spreading quickly
it lasts more than a week
you have a weakened immune system – for example, you have had an organ transplant or you're having chemotherapy
You might need antibiotics to treat the infection.
Also see a GP if you keep getting staph infections.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How staph infections are spread
The bacteria that cause staph infections live harmlessly on many people's skin, often in the nose and armpits and on the buttocks.
They usually only cause an infection if they get into the skin – for example, through a bite or cut.
Staph bacteria can spread to others through:
close skin contact
sharing things like towels or toothbrushes
droplets in coughs and sneezes (less common)
You cannot always prevent staph infections
It can be difficult to prevent staph infections because many people have the bacteria on their skin.
But there are things you can do to reduce your chances of getting an infection or spreading the bacteria to others.
Do
wash your hands with soap and water regularly
keep your skin clean by having a bath or shower every day
keep any cuts clean and covered
use disposable tissues to blow your nose
Don’t
do not share towels, washcloths, bed linen, toothbrushes and razors
Page last reviewed: 10 June 2021
Next review due: 10 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright