Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Vaginal discharge
Vaginal discharge is normal – most women and girls get it. It's a fluid or mucus that keeps the vagina clean and moist, and protects it from infection.
Check if your vaginal discharge is normal
Vaginal discharge is not usually anything to worry about if it:
does not have a strong or unpleasant smell
is clear or white
is thick and sticky
is slippery and wet
You can get vaginal discharge at any age.
The amount of discharge varies. You usually get heavier discharge during pregnancy, if you're sexually active or if you're using birth control. It's often slippery and wet for a few days between your periods (when you ovulate).
When vaginal discharge can be a sign of an infection
If your discharge changes – for example, in smell, colour or texture – it might be a sign of an infection. But do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes
Discharge Possible cause
Smells fishy Bacterial vaginosis
Thick and white, like cottage cheese Thrush
Green, yellow or frothy Trichomoniasis
With pelvic pain or bleeding Chlamydia or gonorrhoea
With blisters or sores Genital herpes
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP or go to a sexual health clinic if:
your vaginal discharge changes colour, smell or texture
you produce more discharge than usual
you feel itchy or sore
you bleed between periods or after sex
you get pain when peeing
you get pain in the area between your tummy and thighs (pelvic pain)
Information:
Sexual health clinics can help with abnormal discharge
Sexual health clinics treat problems with the genitals and urine system.
Many sexual health clinics offer a walk-in service, where you do not need an appointment. They'll often get test results quicker than GP surgeries.
Find a sexual health clinic
Things you can do to help with vaginal discharge
You cannot prevent vaginal discharge.
Panty liners can help with heavy or excessive discharge or if you're worried about any smell. But do not use them all of the time because they can cause irritation.
To help avoid irritation, soreness or dryness:
Do
wash the skin around your vagina gently using plain water
Don’t
do not use perfumed or non-perfumed soaps or gels
do not use deodorants or scented hygiene wipes
do not wash inside your vagina (douche)
Page last reviewed: 25 January 2021
Next review due: 25 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright