Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Polymyalgia rheumatica
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) is a condition that causes pain, stiffness and inflammation in the muscles around the shoulders, neck and hips.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) advice
Get advice about COVID-19 and polymyalgia rheumatica from Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Alliance (ARMA)
Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica
The main symptom is muscle stiffness in the morning that lasts longer than 45 minutes.
Other symptoms may include:
extreme tiredness
loss of appetite
weight loss
depression
See a GP if you have pain and stiffness for more than a week. They'll try to find out what's causing it.
Diagnosing polymyalgia rheumatica can be difficult because the symptoms are similar to those of many other conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis.
These conditions will need to be ruled out before polymyalgia rheumatica is diagnosed.
Causes of polymyalgia rheumatica
The cause of polymyalgia rheumatica is unknown, but a combination of genetic and environmental factors is thought to be responsible.
Polymyalgia rheumatica is an age-related condition. Most people diagnosed with it are over 70, and it's very rare in people younger than 50. It's also more common in women than men.
It's estimated 1 in every 1,200 people in the UK develop the condition every year.
Treating polymyalgia rheumatica
A corticosteroid medicine called prednisolone is the main treatment for polymyalgia rheumatica. It's used to help relieve the symptoms.
To start with, you may be prescribed a moderate dose of prednisolone, which will be gradually reduced over time.
Most people with polymyalgia rheumatica will need a course of corticosteroid treatment that lasts for 18 months to 2 years to prevent their symptoms returning.
Temporal arteritis
Up to 1 in 5 people with polymyalgia rheumatica develop a more serious condition called temporal arteritis (also known as giant cell arteritis), where the arteries in the head and neck become inflamed.
Symptoms of temporal arteritis include:
a severe headache that develops suddenly (your scalp may also feel sore or tender)
pain in the jaw muscles when eating
problems with sight, such as double vision or loss of vision
If you have any of these symptoms, contact a GP immediately, go to 111.nhs.uk, call NHS 111 or go to your nearest urgent care service.
Unlike polymyalgia rheumatica, temporal arteritis requires immediate medical attention. This is because it can cause permanent sight loss if not treated promptly.
Page last reviewed: 30 December 2019
Next review due: 30 December 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright