Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Foot drop
Foot drop (drop foot) is where it's difficult to lift or move your foot and toes. It usually affects 1 foot and can affect the way you walk.
Causes of foot drop
The most common cause of foot drop is an injury to a nerve that runs down your leg and controls the muscles that lift your foot.
This can be caused by:
sports injuries
a slipped disc in the spine
crossing your legs, kneeling or squatting for long periods of time
problems with your nerves (peripheral neuropathy) caused by diabetes
hip or knee replacement surgery
not moving for a long time (for example, if you're staying in hospital)
Foot drop can get better on its own and with treatment, but sometimes it can be permanent.
Less common causes of foot drop include:
inherited conditions like Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
muscle weakness caused by muscular dystrophy, spinal muscular atrophy or motor neurone disease
damage to the brain or spinal cord caused by a stroke, cerebral palsy, Parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you find it difficult to lift the front part of your foot and toes
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
If you have foot drop, a GP will examine your leg and foot, and look at the way you walk.
You may be referred to a specialist for more tests, such as an X-ray, ultrasound scan or CT scan, to find out what's causing your dropped foot.
Treatment for foot drop
How foot drop is treated depends on what's causing it and how long you have had it for.
Sometimes it can get better on its own.
Common treatments for foot drop include:
physiotherapy to strengthen or stretch the muscles in your leg and foot
braces, splints or shoe inserts to help hold the foot in position
a small device that's put in your body and uses electrical signals to help your nerves work (electrical nerve stimulation) – especially if you've had a stroke or have multiple sclerosis
If you have permanent loss of movement from foot drop, you may have surgery to fuse the ankle and foot joints, or repair or graft the nerve.
Things you can do if you have foot drop
There's a higher risk of tripping and falling if you have a foot drop.
But there are some simple changes you can make to help avoid this.
Do
use a walking aid, such as a stick, if you need one
keep the floors in your home clear
remove things you could trip on in your home, such as loose rugs and electrical cables
keep your house well-lit
install handrails on stairs
Find out more about how to prevent falls
Page last reviewed: 06 January 2022
Next review due: 06 January 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright