Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Breast lumps
If you feel a lump in your breast, you should always get it checked by a GP. Most breast lumps are harmless, but some can be serious.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you notice:
a lump in your breast or armpit
any other unusual changes in your breasts – such as the nipple turning inwards, dimpled skin or bloodstained nipple discharge
Changes in the breasts can be a sign of breast cancer. This is easier to treat if it's found early.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
The GP will look at and examine your breasts.
If they're not sure what's causing the lump, they'll refer you to a hospital or breast clinic for further tests.
These tests usually show that a lump is not cancer.
What happens at the breast clinic
At the hospital or breast clinic, you may have a:
breast examination
scan – usually a breast X-ray (mammogram) or ultrasound
biopsy – where a needle is inserted into the lump to remove some cells for testing
These tests are often done during the same visit. You'll usually be told the results on the same day, although biopsy results take longer – you may have to wait about a week.
Breast Cancer Now has more information about what to expect at a breast clinic appointment.
Treatment for a breast lump depends on the cause. Most are harmless and may go away on their own without treatment.
Causes of breast lumps
Lumps in the breasts can have lots of different causes.
They're often caused by something harmless like a non-cancerous tissue growth (fibroadenoma) or a build-up of fluid (breast cyst).
Breast Cancer Now has more information about fibroadenoma and breast cysts.
Sometimes, a breast lump can be a sign of something serious like breast cancer.
Do not self-diagnose
Do not try to self-diagnose the cause of your lump – always see a GP.
Page last reviewed: 14 July 2020
Next review due: 14 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright