Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Dengue
Dengue is a viral infection spread by mosquitoes. It's widespread in many parts of the world.
Mosquitoes in the UK do not spread the dengue virus. It is caught by people visiting or living in Asia, the Americas or the Caribbean.
The infection is usually mild and passes after about 1 week without causing any lasting problems. But in rare cases it can be very serious and potentially life threatening.
There's no specific treatment or widely available vaccine for dengue, so it's important to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes when visiting an area where the infection is found.
Symptoms of dengue
Symptoms of dengue usually develop suddenly, about 5 to 8 days after you become infected.
Symptoms can include:
a high temperature, or feeling hot or shivery
a severe headache
pain behind the eyes
muscle and joint pain
feeling or being sick
a widespread red rash
tummy pain and loss of appetite
The symptoms normally pass after about 1 week, although you may feel tired and slightly unwell for several weeks afterwards.
In rare cases severe dengue can develop after the initial symptoms.
When to get medical advice
Call NHS 111 or see your GP if you develop a fever or flu-like symptoms up to 2 weeks after visitng an area where the dengue virus is found.
Remember to tell the nurse or doctor where you've been travelling.
Go to a doctor or hospital if you develop symptoms while travelling or living in an area where dengue is common. 
There's little a doctor can do to help you recover, but it's important to get a proper diagnosis in case there's another cause of your symptoms.
You may need a blood test to confirm that you have dengue.
Treatment for dengue
There's no cure or specific treatment for dengue. You can only relieve the symptoms until the infection has gone.
You can usually look after yourself at home.
The following may help:
take paracetamol to relieve pain and fever. Do not take aspirin or ibuprofen, as these can cause bleeding problems in people with dengue
drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration – if you're currently abroad, only drink bottled water from a bottle that was properly sealed
get plenty of rest
You should start to feel better after about 1 week, although it may be a few weeks before you feel your normal self again. Get medical advice if your symptoms don't improve.
Where dengue is found
Mosquitoes in the UK do not spread dengue. Cases in the UK usually happen to people who recently travelled to an area where the virus is common.
Dengue is found in parts of:
Southeast Asia
the Caribbean
the Indian subcontinent
South and Central America
Africa
the Pacific Islands
Australia
Use the NHS Fit for Travel destination guide to find out if dengue is a risk in a country you're planning to visit.
How dengue is spread
Dengue is spread by infected mosquitoes, usually the Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus varieties.
These mosquitoes bite during the day, usually early in the morning or in the early evening before dusk.
They're often found near still water in built-up areas, such as in wells, water storage tanks or in old car tyres.
Dengue isn't spread from person to person.
There are four types of the dengue virus. You can get it again if you've had it before, as you'll only be immune to one type of the virus.
Preventing dengue
There's currently no widely available vaccine for dengue. You can prevent it by avoiding being bitten by mosquitoes.
The following can reduce your risk of being bitten:
use insect repellent – products containing 50% DEET are most effective, but a lower strength (15 to 30% DEET) should be used on children, and alternatives to DEET should be used on children younger than 2 months
wear loose but protective clothing – mosquitoes can bite through tight-fitting clothes. Trousers, long-sleeved shirts, and socks and shoes (not sandals) are best
sleep under a mosquito net – ideally one that has been treated with insecticide
be aware of your environment – mosquitoes that spread dengue breed in still water in urban areas
It's a good idea to speak to a GP, practice nurse or visit a travel clinic before travelling to get specific advice about what you can do to avoid dengue and other travel illnesses.
Severe dengue
In rare cases dengue can be very serious and potentially life threatening. This is known as severe dengue or dengue haemorrhagic fever.
People who've had dengue before are thought to be most at risk of severe dengue if they become infected again. It's very rare for travellers to get it.
Signs of severe dengue can include:
severe tummy pain
a swollen tummy
being sick repeatedly and vomiting blood
bleeding gums or bleeding under the skin
breathing difficulties or fast breathing
cold, clammy skin
a weak but fast pulse
drowsiness or loss of consciousness
If you have symptoms of severe dengue, immediately call 999, go to A&E or call the local emergency number if you're abroad.
Page last reviewed: 08 August 2019
Next review due: 08 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright