Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Mental health Talking therapies, medicine and psychiatry Medicines and psychiatry
Psychiatry
Psychiatry is a medical field concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of mental health conditions.
A doctor who works in psychiatry is called a psychiatrist. Unlike other mental health professionals, such as psychologists and counsellors, psychiatrists must be medically qualified doctors who have chosen to specialise in psychiatry. This means they can prescribe medication as well as recommend other forms of treatment.
Most psychiatrists work as part of community mental health teams (CMHTs), in outpatient clinics or hospital wards. Some carry out sessions in GP surgeries.
What conditions can psychiatrists treat?
Mental health conditions that may be diagnosed and treated by a psychiatrist include:
anxiety
phobias
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
personality disorders
schizophrenia and paranoia
depression and bipolar disorder
dementia and Alzheimer's disease
eating disorders, such as anorexia and bulimia
sleep disorders, such as insomnia
addictions, such as drug or alcohol misuse
Psychiatrists may also provide psychological support for people with long-term, painful or terminal physical health conditions.
Getting an appointment with a psychiatrist
You'll usually need a referral from your GP or another doctor to see a psychiatrist on the NHS.
Your GP may refer you directly to a psychiatrist or to a member of a local mental health team, who can assess your needs and help determine if you need to see a psychiatrist or a different mental health professional.
You can also see a psychiatrist privately, although most private psychiatrists prefer a referral from your GP. Your GP may be able to recommend psychiatrists in your area. You can also try contacting a psychiatric clinic directly or using online psychiatry services.
You'll see a psychiatrist who specialises in the area of psychiatry most relevant to your situation. The main areas of expertise include:
childhood and adolescent psychiatry
general adult psychiatry
older person's psychiatry
learning disabilities
psychotherapy (talking therapies)
You can check the details of a psychiatrist, including their area of speciality, by looking on the medical register, a directory of all practising doctors in the UK.
If they have the letters MRCPsych (Member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists) or FRCPsych (Fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists) after their name, they're a current member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych).
What happens during your appointments
During your first appointment, your psychiatrist will carry out an initial assessment. They'll look at both your mental and physical health, and may ask:
about the problem that brought you to see them
general questions about your life and thoughts
to carry out a simple physical examination, such as checking your blood pressure – for example, before prescribing certain medications
for information from other sources, such as your GP, relatives and social workers
After assessing your condition, the psychiatrist may prescribe medication or recommend other treatments, such as counselling or cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
The number of times you need to see a psychiatrist and the length of each appointment will depend on your circumstances.
A psychiatrist may continue to manage your treatment or they may refer you to other community mental health services in your area. These services work in small units or clinics and aim to help people manage their illness so they can lead a normal life within the community.
Further information and support
The Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych) have mental health advice in a number of areas including problems and disorders, treatments and wellbeing and advice for parents and young people.
More in Medicines and psychiatry
Psychiatry
Stopping or coming off antidepressants
Antidepressants
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Page last reviewed: 20 July 2018
Next review due: 20 July 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright