Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is pressure on a nerve in your wrist. It causes tingling, numbness and pain in your hand and fingers. You can often treat it yourself, but it can take months to get better.
Check if you have carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)
The symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome include:
an ache or pain in your fingers, hand or arm
numb hands
tingling or pins and needles
a weak thumb or difficulty gripping
These symptoms often start slowly and come and go. They're usually worse at night.
How to treat carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) yourself
CTS sometimes gets better by itself in a few months, particularly if you have it because you're pregnant.
Wear a wrist splint
A wrist splint is something you wear on your hand to keep your wrist straight. It helps to relieve pressure on the nerve.
You wear it at night while you sleep. You'll have to wear a splint for at least 4 weeks before it starts to feel better.
You can buy wrist splints online or from pharmacies.
Stop or cut down on things that may be causing it
Stop or cut down on anything that causes you to frequently bend your wrist or grip hard, such as using vibrating tools for work or playing an instrument.
Painkillers
Painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen may help carpal tunnel pain short-term.
But there's little evidence to say they can treat the cause of CTS, so it's important not to rely on them.
Hand exercises
There's a small amount of evidence to suggest hand exercises help ease the symptoms of CTS.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your symptoms are getting worse or are not going away
treatment at home is not working
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
A GP can usually diagnose CTS by asking about your symptoms and checking your hand.
If they're not sure it's CTS, they may refer you to hospital for tests, such as an ultrasound scan.
Treatment for carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) from a GP
If a wrist splint does not help, the GP might recommend a steroid injection into your wrist. This brings down swelling around the nerve, easing the symptoms of CTS.
Steroid injections are not always a cure. CTS can come back after a few months and you may need another injection.
Carpal tunnel syndrome surgery
If your CTS is getting worse and other treatments have not worked, the GP might refer you to a specialist to discuss surgery.
Surgery usually cures CTS. You and your specialist will decide together if it's the right treatment for you.
An injection numbs your wrist so you do not feel pain (local anaesthetic) and a small cut is made in your hand. The carpal tunnel inside your wrist is cut so it no longer puts pressure on the nerve.
The operation takes around 20 minutes and you do not have to stay in hospital overnight.
It can take a month after the operation to get back to normal activities.
What causes carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)
CTS happens when the carpal tunnel inside your wrist swells and squeezes 1 of your nerves (median nerve).
You're more at risk if you:
are overweight
are pregnant
do work or hobbies that mean you repeatedly bend your wrist or grip hard, such as using vibrating tools
have another illness, such as arthritis or diabetes
have a parent, brother or sister with CTS
have previously injured your wrist
Page last reviewed: 16 February 2021
Next review due: 16 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright