Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Arrhythmia
Arrhythmias or heart rhythm problems are experienced by more than 2 million people in the UK. Most people with an abnormal heart rhythm can lead a normal life if it is properly diagnosed.
The main types of arrhythmia are:
atrial fibrillation (AF) – this is the most common type, where the heart beats irregularly and faster than normal
supraventricular tachycardia – episodes of abnormally fast heart rate at rest
bradycardia – the heart beats more slowly than normal
heart block – the heart beats more slowly than normal and can cause people to collapse
ventricular fibrillation – a rare, rapid and disorganised rhythm of heartbeats that rapidly leads to loss of consciousness and sudden death if not treated immediately
Arrhythmias can affect all age groups, but atrial fibrillation is more common in older people. Drinking alcohol in excess or being overweight increases your likelihood of developing atrial fibrillation.
You may also be at risk of developing an arrhythmia if your heart tissue is damaged because of an illness – for example, if you have had a heart attack or have heart failure, or if you have had severe coronavirus (COVID-19).
Atrial fibrillation is a common cause of stroke. Having atrial fibrillation means your risk of stroke is 5 times higher than for someone whose heart rhythm is normal.
Certain types of arrhythmia occur in people with severe heart conditions, and can cause sudden cardiac death. This kills 100,000 people in the UK every year. Some of these deaths could be avoided if the arrhythmias were diagnosed earlier.
Common triggers for an arrhythmia are viral illnesses, alcohol, tobacco, changes in posture, exercise, drinks containing caffeine, certain over-the-counter and prescribed medicines, and illegal recreational drugs.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) advice
Get advice about coronavirus (COVID-19) and arrhythmia from the British Heart Foundation
Preventing arrhythmias
It is not always possible to prevent an arrhythmia developing, although a healthy lifestyle can lower your risk of developing a heart condition.
Treatment aims to prevent future episodes. You can also make lifestyle changes so you avoid some of the triggers for your heart rhythm problem.
Your heart's electrical system
The heart's rhythm is controlled by electrical signals. An arrhythmia is an abnormality of the heart's rhythm. It may beat too slowly, too quickly, or irregularly.
These abnormalities range from a minor inconvenience or discomfort to a potentially fatal problem.
Symptoms of arrhythmias
Symptoms of arrhythmias include palpitations, feeling dizzy, fainting and being short of breath, although having these symptoms does not always mean you have a heart rhythm problem.
Arrhythmia Alliance's heart rhythm checklists can help you gather information to discuss with your GP if you have any of these symptoms.
Diagnosing arrhythmias
If your symptoms persist or there's a history of unexplained sudden death in your family, it's important for your GP to refer you to a heart specialist (a cardiologist or electrophysiologist who specialises in heart rhythm disorders).
The most effective way to diagnose an arrhythmia is with an electrical recording of your heart rhythm called an electrocardiogram (ECG). If the ECG doesn't find a problem, you may need further monitoring of your heart.
This may involve wearing a small portable ECG recording device for 24 hours or longer. This is called a Holter monitor or ambulatory ECG monitoring. Some people might be asked to wear an ECG monitor for up to 14 days.
If your symptoms seem to be triggered by exercise, an exercise ECG may be needed to record your heart rhythm while you are using a treadmill or exercise bike.
You should request a copy of your ECG. Take it with you to see the cardiologist or heart rhythm specialist and always keep a copy for future use.
Other tests used in diagnosing arrhythmias include:
cardiac event recorder – a device to record occasional symptoms over a period of time whenever you have them
electrophysiological (EP) study – a test to locate problems with the electrical signals in your heart by passing soft wires up a vein in your leg and into your heart while you are sedated
echocardiogram (echo) – an ultrasound scan of your heart
Treatment for arrhythmias
How your arrhythmia will be treated will depend on whether it is a fast or slow arrhythmia or heart block. Any underlying causes of your arrhythmia, such as heart failure, will need to be treated as well.
The treatments used for arrhythmias include:
medicine – to stop or prevent an arrhythmia or control the rate of an arrhythmia
electrical cardioversion – a treatment that uses electricity to shock the heart back into a normal rhythm while you are anaesthetised or sedated
catheter ablation – a keyhole treatment under local or general anaesthetic that carefully destroys the diseased tissue in your heart that causes the arrhythmia
pacemaker – a small device containing its own battery that is implanted in your chest under local anaesthetic; it produces electrical signals to do the work of the natural pacemaker in your heart to help it beat at a normal rate
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) – a device similar to a pacemaker that monitors your heart rhythm and shocks your heart back into a normal rhythm whenever this is needed
Staying safe with an arrhythmia
If you have an arrhythmia that affects your driving, you must tell the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA).
If your job involves working at height or with machinery that could be dangerous, you will need to stop work at least until your arrhythmia is diagnosed or you get treatment for your underlying condition. Get advice from your GP or cardiologist.
Support services
Find heart disease information and support services
Find atrial fibrillation services
Find pacemaker implantation services
Other heart rhythm pages
See the list below for information about specific heart rhythm problems.
Atrial fibrillation
Brugada syndrome
Heart block
Heart palpitations
Long QT syndrome
Supraventricular tachycardia
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Page last reviewed: 14 September 2021
Next review due: 14 September 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright