Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Catarrh
Catarrh is a build-up of mucus in an airway or cavity of the body.
It usually affects the back of the nose, the throat or the sinuses (air-filled cavities in the bones of the face).
It's often temporary, but some people experience it for months or years. This is known as chronic catarrh.
Catarrh can be a nuisance and may be difficult to get rid of, but it's not harmful and there are treatments available.
Symptoms associated with catarrh
Catarrh can lead to a:
constant need to clear your throat
feeling that your throat is blocked
blocked or stuffy nose that you cannot clear
runny nose
feeling of mucus running down the back of your throat
persistent cough
headache or facial pain
reduced sense of smell and taste
crackling sensation in your ear and some temporary hearing loss
These problems can be frustrating to live with and may affect your sleep, making you feel tired.
Treatments for catarrh
Catarrh will often pass in a few days or weeks as the condition that causes it improves.
There are things you can try at home to relieve your symptoms, such as:
avoiding things that trigger your symptoms, such as allergens or smoky places
taking sips of cold water when you feel the need to clear your throat – constantly clearing your throat may make things worse
using a saline nasal rinse several times a day – these can be bought from a pharmacy or made at home with half a teaspoon of salt in a pint of boiled water that's been left to cool
avoiding warm, dry atmospheres, such as places with air conditioning and car heating systems – placing plants or bowls of water in a room may help to keep the air humid
staying well hydrated
talking to a pharmacist about suitable over-the-counter medicines – including decongestants, antihistamines or steroid nasal sprays
There are also several remedies, such as herbal medicines, available from health shops and pharmacies that claim to treat catarrh.
Some people find these helpful, but there's generally little scientific evidence to suggest they work.
When to see a GP
Speak to a GP if your catarrh persists and is becoming difficult to live with.
They may want to rule out conditions that could be causing it, such as nasal polyps or allergies.
This may mean you need to be referred to a specialist for tests.
If you're diagnosed with a specific underlying condition, treating it may help relieve your catarrh.
For example, nasal polyps may be treated with a steroid nasal spray, or in some cases surgery. 
Find out more about treating nasal polyps
If a cause for your catarrh cannot be found, the self-help techniques above may be recommended. 
Unfortunately, however, chronic catarrh can be hard to treat and may last for a long time.
What causes catarrh?
Catarrh is usually caused by the immune system reacting to an infection or irritation, which causes the lining of your nose and throat to become swollen and produce mucus.
This can be triggered by:
a cold or other infections
hay fever or other types of allergic rhinitis
non-allergic rhinitis
nasal polyps
It's unclear what causes chronic catarrh, but it's not thought to be the result of an allergy or infection.
It may be related to an abnormality in the way mucus travels within the nose or an increased sensitivity to mucus in the back of the nose and throat.
Page last reviewed: 16 November 2018
Next review due: 16 November 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright