Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Restricted growth (dwarfism)
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Treatment
Restricted growth, sometimes known as dwarfism, is a condition characterised by unusually short height.
There are 2 main types of restricted growth:
proportionate short stature (PSS) – a general lack of growth in the body, arms and legs
disproportionate short stature (DSS) – where the arms and legs are particularly short
As well as being short, some people with restricted growth also have other physical problems, such as bowed legs or an unusually curved spine.
But most people don't have any other serious problems and are able to live a relatively normal life, with a normal life expectancy.
Read more about the symptoms of restricted growth.
What causes restricted growth?
Causes of PSS
The most common cause of PSS is being born to small parents, but it's sometimes the result of the body not producing enough growth hormone.
Certain genetic syndromes, such as Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome, can also cause PSS.
Causes of DSS
A rare genetic condition called achondroplasia is the most common cause of DSS.
It causes poor bone growth, resulting in short upper arms and thighs.
It doesn't always run in the family – many children with achondroplasia have parents of normal height.
The Restricted Growth Association UK has more information about achondroplasia and other rare types of restricted growth.
Diagnosing restricted growth
Restricted growth may be diagnosed before a child is born, soon afterwards, or when growth problems become more obvious as they get older.
Growth hormone deficiency is usually diagnosed using growth hormone stimulation tests.
Medicine is injected into a vein or muscle to cause an increase in growth hormone levels in the blood. A lower than normal level indicates a deficiency in growth hormone.
A brain scan will be needed to look at the pituitary gland (which produces growth hormone) if blood tests show low levels of growth hormone.
If one or both parents have a family history of a condition that causes short stature, their baby can be tested for this during pregnancy (prenatal diagnosis).
Read more about screening tests in pregnancy.
Treatment for restricted growth
Treatment with growth hormone injections may benefit some people with restricted growth and can help a child with the condition grow more than they otherwise would.
In cases of DSS where the legs are particularly short, a leg-lengthening procedure is sometimes used, but there's some uncertainty about its safety and effectiveness.
Read more about treatments for restricted growth.
Page last reviewed: 30 March 2021
Next review due: 30 March 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright