Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Treatment
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), also known as Lewy body dementia, is one of the most common types of dementia.
Dementia is the name for problems with mental abilities caused by gradual changes and damage in the brain. It's rare in people under 65.
It tends to develop slowly and get gradually worse over several years.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and dementia:
Alzheimer's Society: Coronavirus information for people affected by dementia
Dementia UK: Coronavirus questions and answers
Symptoms of dementia with Lewy bodies
People with dementia with Lewy bodies may have:
hallucinations – seeing, hearing or smelling things that are not there
problems with understanding, thinking, memory and judgement – this is similar to Alzheimer's disease, although memory may be less affected in people with dementia with Lewy bodies
confusion or sleepiness – this can change over minutes or hours
slow movement, stiff limbs and tremors (uncontrollable shaking)
disturbed sleep, often with violent movements and shouting out
fainting spells, unsteadiness and falls
These problems can make daily activities increasingly difficult and someone with the condition may eventually be unable to look after themselves.
Read more about the symptoms of dementia with Lewy bodies
Getting medical advice
See a GP if you think you have early symptoms of dementia, especially if you're over 65 years of age.
If you're worried about someone else, encourage them to make an appointment with a GP and perhaps suggest that you go with them.
The GP can do some simple checks to try to find the cause of your symptoms and they can refer you to a memory clinic or another specialist for further tests if needed.
Read more about getting a dementia diagnosis
Tests for dementia with Lewy bodies
There's no single test for dementia with Lewy bodies.
The following may be needed to make a diagnosis:
an assessment of symptoms – for example, whether there are typical symptoms of dementia with Lewy bodies
an assessment of mental abilities – this will usually involve a number of tasks and questions
blood tests to rule out conditions with similar symptoms
brain scans, such as an MRI scan, CT scan or a SPECT scan – these can detect signs of dementia or other problems with the brain
Read more about the tests used to diagnose dementia
Treatments for dementia with Lewy bodies
There's currently no cure for dementia with Lewy bodies or any treatment that will slow it down.
But there are treatments that can help control some of the symptoms, possibly for several years.
Treatments include:
medicines to reduce hallucinations, confusion, drowsiness, movement problems and disturbed sleep
therapies such as physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech and language therapy for problems with movement, everyday tasks, and communication
psychological therapies, such as cognitive stimulation (activities and exercises designed to improve memory, problem solving skills and language ability)
dementia activities, such as memory cafes (drop-in sessions for people with memory problems and their carers to get support and advice)
Read more about how dementia with Lewy bodies is treated
Outlook for dementia with Lewy bodies
How quickly dementia with Lewy bodies gets worse varies from person to person.
Home-based help will usually be needed, and some people will eventually need care in a nursing home.
The average survival time after diagnosis is similar to that of Alzheimer's disease – around 6 to 12 years. But this is highly variable and some people live much longer than this.
If you or a loved one has been diagnosed with dementia, remember that you're not alone. The NHS and social services, as well as voluntary organisations, can provide advice and support for you and your family.
Causes of dementia with Lewy bodies
Dementia with Lewy bodies is caused by clumps of protein forming inside brain cells. These abnormal deposits are called Lewy bodies.
These deposits are also found in people with Parkinson's disease, and they build up in areas of the brain responsible for functions such as thinking, visual perception and muscle movement.
It's not clear why the deposits develop and how exactly they damage the brain. It's thought that part of the problem is the proteins affecting the brain's normal functions by interfering with signals sent between brain cells.
Dementia with Lewy bodies usually occurs in people with no family history of the condition, although there have been very rare cases that seem to run in families.
More information
Living with dementia
Dementia activities
Living well with dementia
Staying independent with dementia
Looking after someone with dementia
Dementia and relationships
Communicating with someone with dementia
Coping with dementia behaviour changes
Care and support
Help and support
Dementia and care homes
Dementia, social services, and the NHS
Dementia and managing money
Managing legal affairs for someone with dementia
End of life planning
How you can help
Share your dementia experiences
Page last reviewed: 09 December 2019
Next review due: 09 December 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright