Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Gangrene
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
Gangrene is a serious condition where a loss of blood supply causes body tissue to die. It can affect any part of the body but typically starts in the toes, feet, fingers and hands.
Gangrene can occur as a result of an injury, infection or a long-term condition that affects blood circulation.
Symptoms of gangrene include:
redness and swelling in the affected area
either a loss of sensation or severe pain in the affected area
sores or blisters in the affected area that bleed or produce a foul-smelling pus
You should see your GP immediately if you're worried you may have gangrene.
Read more about the symptoms of gangrene and diagnosing gangrene.
Who's affected
Anyone can develop gangrene, particularly after a serious injury, but there are certain groups of people who are more at risk.
These include people with long-term conditions that can affect the blood vessels, such as:
diabetes – a lifelong condition that causes a person's blood sugar level to become too high
atherosclerosis – where the arteries become clogged up with a fatty substance called plaque, narrowing them and restricting blood flow 
peripheral arterial disease – where a build-up of fatty deposits in the arteries restricts blood supply to leg muscles
Raynaud's – where blood vessels in certain parts of the body, usually the fingers or toes, react abnormally to cold temperatures
Read more about the causes of gangrene.
How gangrene is treated
The earlier treatment for gangrene begins, the more successful it's likely to be. The main treatments include surgery to remove damaged tissue, known as debridement, and antibiotics to treat any underlying infection.
In some cases, surgery may be needed to restore blood flow to the affected area.
In more severe cases, it may be necessary to remove an entire body part such as a toe, foot, or lower leg. This is known as amputation.
Read more about treating gangrene.
Preventing gangrene
Many cases of gangrene can be prevented.
If you have a condition that increases your risk of getting gangrene, such as diabetes, it's important you have regular check-ups to assess the state of your feet. Report any problems to your GP as soon as possible.
Stopping smoking if you smoke and adopting a healthy lifestyle, with a low-fat diet and regular exercise, can also improve your circulation and reduce your risk of developing gangrene.
Read more about preventing gangrene.
Page last reviewed: 16 August 2018
Next review due: 16 August 2021
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright