Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Erythromelalgia
Erythromelalgia is a rare condition that causes episodes of burning pain and redness in the feet, and sometimes the hands, arms, legs, ears and face.
Symptoms of erythromelalgia can begin at any age. Some people may have had it from early childhood, while some are only affected as adults.
Symptoms of erythromelalgia
The 3 main symptoms of erythromelalgia are heat, pain and redness in the skin.
The feet are most commonly affected, but the hands, arms, legs, ears and face can be too.
Credit:
The pain can range from mild, with only a slight tingling feeling like pins and needles, to a severe burning pain, which can be bad enough to make walking, standing, socialising, exercising and sleeping difficult.
It can have a significant impact on work or school life.
People with erythromelalgia typically have episodes or "flare-ups" of pain lasting from a few minutes to several days.
The flare-ups usually start as an itching sensation, which worsens to pain, and tender mottled, red skin that feels warm or hot to the touch.
Other symptoms may include:
swelling of the affected body part
sweating in the affected area more or less than you usually would
purple discolouration when there's no flare-up
Triggers for erythromelalgia
Symptoms of erythromelalgia are usually triggered by an increase in body temperature.
This can happen:
after exercising
when wearing warm socks, gloves or tight shoes
after entering a warm room
when feeling stressed
when drinking alcohol or eating spicy food
when you're dehydrated
Things you can do to ease erythromelalgia
Cooling or raising the affected part of your body may help relieve the symptoms of erythromelalgia.
You can cool your skin using a fan, cool water, a cool surface or cool gel packs.
But avoid using ice or anything that's too cold, and do not soak your hands or feet for a long time in cold water.
This can lead to hypothermia or skin damage.
And there's also a risk the change in temperature may trigger a flare-up when the affected area warms up again.
Treatments for erythromelalgia
Medicines for the skin
Some medicines that are applied directly to the skin (topical medicines) have been found to help relieve the symptoms of erythromelalgia.
These may be in the form of creams, gels, sprays or patches. You may be prescribed a capsaicin cream or patch to make the heat receptors in your skin less sensitive.
A local anaesthetic called lidocaine may also be prescribed in the form of a cream, gel or spray.
A GP will be able to give you more information about these medicines and if they're right for you.
You can also speak to a pharmacist about lidocaine creams.
Medicines taken by mouth
A number of different medicines taken by mouth (orally) may help relieve the symptoms of erythromelalgia.
You may need to try several different medicines, under the supervision of a doctor, before you find the one or the combination that works best for you.
Your treatment options will also depend on the type of erythromelalgia you have.
Many treatments require referral to a specialist centre so benefits and potential side effects can be closely monitored.
The types of medicine a doctor may prescribe include:
dietary supplements – such as magnesium, which can help open up your blood vessels
aspirin – only used for adults, not for children
anti-epilepsy medicines – such as gabapentin or carbamazepine
blood pressure medicines – medicine to either open up your blood vessels and increase blood flow, or beta blockers to help reduce blood flow, depending on the cause of your erythromelalgia
low doses of antidepressants – such as duloxetine, venlafaxine, amitriptyline or nortriptyline
prescription-only painkillers
Medicines given through a drip
If oral medicine does not manage to control your symptoms, you may be given medicine directly into the bloodstream through a drip (intravenous infusion).
Lidocaine, a local anaesthetic that can help nerve-related pain, can be given this way. But how long it works for varies between people.
Your doctor will explain this procedure to you and how you should prepare for it.
Causes of erythromelalgia
The cause of erythromelalgia is usually unknown.
But it's sometimes caused by another underlying medical condition or a faulty gene inherited from a parent.
Other medical conditions
Erythromelalgia sometimes results from an underlying condition, such as:
a blood disorder – like polycythaemia
nerve damage – for example, caused by peripheral neuropathy
multiple sclerosis (MS)
an autoimmune problem – such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis, where the immune system attacks the body's own tissues
It may also be caused by certain medicines. Your doctor will be able to give you more information on this.
Genetic cause
Some people with erythromelalgia have a faulty gene that causes the condition.
Erythromelalgia can run in families when the faulty gene is passed down (inherited) from a parent to their child.
The faulty gene causes changes in the way pain signals are delivered to the brain, increasing or strengthening them.
More information and support
Specialist centres in the UK
For children: Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children Pain Control Service
For adults: National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery Pain Management Centre
Organisations that provide support
The Erythromelalgia Association
Foundation for Peripheral Neuropathy
Pain Concern
National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service
If you or your child has erythromelalgia, your clinical team will pass the information on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service (NCARDRS).
The NCARDRS helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat erythromelalgia. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Page last reviewed: 09 October 2020
Next review due: 09 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright