Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Cuts and grazes
Most cuts and grazes are minor and can be easily treated at home.
Stopping the bleeding, cleaning the wound thoroughly and covering it with a plaster or dressing is usually all that's needed.
Minor wounds should start to heal within a few days.
How to treat cuts and grazes
Stop the bleeding
Stop any bleeding before applying a dressing to the wound. Apply pressure to the area using a clean and dry absorbent material – such as a bandage, towel or handkerchief – for several minutes.
If the cut is to your hand or arm, raise it above your head to help reduce the flow of blood.
If the injury is to a lower limb, lie down and raise the affected area above the level of your heart.
Clean the wound and apply a dressing
When the wound has stopped bleeding, clean it and cover it with a dressing to help stop it becoming infected.
To do this:
wash and dry your hands thoroughly
clean the wound under drinking-quality running tap water – avoid using antiseptic as it may damage the skin and slow healing
pat the area dry with a clean towel
apply a sterile adhesive dressing, such as a plaster – read more about how to apply plasters and other dressings
Keep the dressing clean by changing it as often as necessary. Use waterproof dressings to keep the wound dry while bathing and showering.
You can remove the dressing after a few days, once the wound has closed itself.
Take painkillers if needed
If the wound is painful for the first few days, you can take over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen.
When to get medical help
Call NHS 111 or visit your local walk-in centre, minor injuries unit or GP surgery if there's a risk your wound could become infected, or you think it's already infected.
A wound is at risk of infection if:
it's been contaminated with dirt, pus or other bodily fluids
there was something in the wound before it was cleaned, such as gravel or a shard of glass
it has a jagged edge
it's longer than 5cm (2 inches)
it was caused by an animal or human bite
Signs a wound has become infected include:
swelling, redness and increasing pain in the affected area
pus forming in or around the wound
feeling generally unwell
a high temperature (fever) of 38C or above
swollen glands under your chin or in your neck, armpits or groin
An infected wound can usually be successfully treated with a short course of antibiotics.
When to go to A&E
Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible if:
you can't stop the bleeding
you're bleeding from an artery – blood from an artery comes out in spurts with each beat of the heart, and is bright red and usually hard to control
you experience persistent or significant loss of sensation near the wound or you're having trouble moving any body parts
you have a severe cut to your face – you may need urgent treatment to prevent scarring
you have a cut on the palm of your hand and it looks infected – these types of infection can spread quickly
there's a possibility a foreign body is still inside the wound
the wound is very large or the injury has caused a lot of tissue damage
In A&E, your wound will be examined to determine whether there's a risk of infection. You may need an injection to prevent tetanus (a bacterial infection), and your wound may be closed with stitches, strips or special glue before a dressing is applied.
If there's a risk of infection, the wound won't usually be closed because this may trap any infection inside. Instead, it will be packed with a non-sticky dressing before being covered with a protective dressing until it's safe to close.
Page last reviewed: 18 October 2018
Next review due: 18 October 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright