Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Pulmonary embolism
A pulmonary embolism is a blocked blood vessel in your lungs. It can be life-threatening if not treated quickly.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you feel pain in your chest or upper back
you have difficulty breathing
you're coughing up blood
These can be symptoms of pulmonary embolism.
You may also have pain, redness and swelling in one of your legs (usually the calf). These are symptoms of a blood clot, also called deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing
your heart is beating very fast
someone has passed out
These could be signs of a pulmonary embolism or another serious condition.
Treating a pulmonary embolism
If a GP thinks you've got a pulmonary embolism, you'll be sent to hospital for further tests and treatment.
At hospital, you'll probably be given an injection of anticoagulant medicine before you get any test results.
Anticoagulants stop blood clots getting bigger and prevent new clots forming.
If tests confirm you have a pulmonary embolism, you'll continue with anticoagulant injections for at least 5 days.
You'll also need to take anticoagulant tablets for at least 3 months.
You should make a full recovery from a pulmonary embolism if it's spotted and treated early.
Reduce your pulmonary embolism risk
A pulmonary embolism often happens when part of the blood clot dislodges itself from your leg and travels up to your lungs, causing a blockage.
There are measures you can take to lower your risk of getting a pulmonary embolism.
If you're being treated in hospital for another condition, your medical team should take steps to prevent DVT.
A DVT can occasionally develop on journeys lasting more than 6 hours.
To reduce your risk of getting a travel-related DVT:
Do
sit comfortably in your seat and lie back as much as possible
wear loose-fitting clothing
make sure you have plenty of leg room
drink water regularly
take regular breaks from sitting
bend and straighten your legs, feet and toes every 30 minutes while seated
press the balls of your feet down hard against the floor every so often
wear flight socks
Don’t
do not sit for long periods without moving
do not drink alcohol
do not drink too much coffee and other caffeine-based drinks
do not take sleeping pills
Page last reviewed: 22 April 2020
Next review due: 22 April 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright