Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Tay-Sachs disease
Tay-Sachs disease is a rare inherited condition that mainly affects babies and young children. It stops the nerves working properly and is usually fatal.
It used to be most common in people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent (most Jewish people in the UK), but many cases now occur in people from other ethnic backgrounds.
Symptoms
Symptoms of infantile Tay-Sachs disease usually start when a child is 3 to 6 months old.
The main symptoms include:
being overly startled by noises and movement
being very slow to reach milestones like learning to crawl, and losing skills they have already learnt
floppiness and weakness, which keeps getting worse until they're unable to move (paralysis)
difficulty swallowing
loss of vision or hearing
muscle stiffness
seizures (fits)
The condition is usually fatal by around 3 to 5 years of age, often due to complications of a lung infection (pneumonia).
Rarer types of Tay-Sachs disease start later in childhood (juvenile Tay-Sachs disease) or early adulthood (late-onset Tay-Sachs disease). The late-onset type doesn't always shorten life expectancy.
How it's inherited
Tay-Sachs disease is caused by a problem in a child's genes that means their nerves stop working properly.
A child can only have it if both parents have this faulty gene. The parents themselves don't usually have any symptoms – this is known as being a "carrier".
If 2 people who are carriers have a child, there's a:
1 in 4 (25%) chance the child won't inherit any faulty genes and won't have Tay-Sachs disease or be able to pass it on
1 in 2 (50%) chance the child inherits a faulty gene from one parent and becomes a carrier, but won't have the condition themselves
1 in 4 (25%) chance the child inherits a faulty gene from both parents and develops Tay-Sachs disease
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP if:
you're planning a pregnancy and you or your partner have an Ashkenazi Jewish background, a history of Tay-Sachs disease in either of your families, or you know you're carriers
you're pregnant and concerned your baby could have Tay-Sachs disease – you can also speak to your midwife for advice
you're worried your child might have symptoms of Tay-Sachs disease – especially if someone in your family had it
If you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy, you may be referred for genetic and genomic testing to see if you're at risk of having a child with Tay-Sachs disease and to talk to a genetics counsellor about your options.
If your child has possible symptoms of Tay-Sachs disease, a blood test can show if they have it.
Treatments
There's currently no cure for Tay-Sachs disease. The aim of treatment is to make living with it as comfortable as possible.
You'll see a team of specialists, who will help come up with a treatment plan for your child.
Treatments may include:
medicines for seizures and stiffness
speech and language therapy for feeding and swallowing problems – sometimes special bottles or a feeding tube may be needed
physiotherapy to help with stiffness and improve coughing (to reduce the risk of pneumonia)
antibiotics to treat infections like pneumonia if they occur
Your care team will talk to you about end of life care, such as where you'd like your child to receive care and if you'd like them to be resuscitated if their lungs stop working.
Further information and advice
You can get more information and support from:
the Cure & Action for Tay-Sachs (CATS) Foundation
Climb
Genetic Alliance UK
the National Tay-Sachs & Allied Diseases Association (NTSAD) – an American foundation for people with Tay-Sachs disease
If you're interested in finding out more about research into treatments for Tay-Sachs disease, ask your care team about any research you might be able to get involved in.
Information about your child
If your child has Tay-Sachs disease, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service (NCARDRS).
This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Find out more about the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service register on GOV.UK.
Page last reviewed: 23 September 2021
Next review due: 23 September 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright