Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Snake bites
Most snake bites in the UK are not serious. But it's important to get all snake bites checked as soon as possible.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E immediately if:
you think you, or someone else, has been bitten by a snake
Find your nearest A&E
Information:
If you're not in the UK when you are bitten by a snake, contact the emergency medical services in the country you're in.
Get foreign travel advice on GOV.UK
What to do while you're waiting for help
Do
stay calm, most snake bites in the UK are not serious and can be treated
keep the part of your body that was bitten as still as you can
lie in the recovery position if you can
take paracetamol for any pain
try to remember the colour and pattern of the snake to tell the doctor
take off any jewellery and loosen clothes near the bite, in case it swells
Don’t
do not go near the snake, or try to catch or kill it
do not try to suck or cut the poison (venom) out of the bite
do not tie anything tightly round the part of the body where the bite is
do not take aspirin or ibuprofen, as they can make bleeding worse
What happens at the hospital
You will usually need to stay in hospital for at least 24 hours if you have been bitten by a snake.
The bite will be cleaned and bandaged. You may be given an injection to help protect you from tetanus.
If you were bitten by a poisonous (venomous) snake you will be treated with a medicine to fight the venom. This is given through a thin tube into a vein, called a drip.
Types of UK snake
Only 3 types of snake are found in the wild in the UK.
The adder is the only venomous snake, but you should get all snake bites checked as soon as possible.
Telling the doctors the colour and pattern of the snake that bit you could help them treat it.
Adders are grey or reddish-brown, with a dark zig-zag shaped stripe down their back.
Credit:
Grass snakes are usually green, with dark spots down their sides and yellow and black bands around their neck.
Credit:
Smooth snakes are usually grey or brown with a dark pattern. The pattern down their backs are lighter and less zig-zag shaped than on adders.
Credit:
Page last reviewed: 23 December 2019
Next review due: 23 December 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright