Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis is a painful bone infection. It usually goes away if treated early with antibiotics. If not, it can cause permanent damage.
What is osteomyelitis?
Osteomyelitis is an infection that usually causes pain in the long bones in the legs.
Other bones, such as those in the back or arms, can also be affected.
Anyone can develop osteomyelitis.
You're more at risk of getting an infection in a bone if you have:
recently broken (fractured) a bone
been injured or have a wound
an artificial hip, or a screw in a bone
recently had any surgery on a bone
a weakened immune system – for example, because of chemotherapy or you have another serious illness
had osteomyelitis before
diabetes, especially if you also have a foot ulcer
Sometimes an infection in the blood affects the bone.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
pain, swelling, redness and a warm sensation over an area of bone
a very high temperature (or you feel hot and shivery) and feel generally unwell
had osteomyelitis before and you think symptoms have come back
Take your child to a GP if:
they do not want to use an arm or leg and seem irritable – young children do not always get a high temperature with osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis can permanently damage bones if it's not treated quickly.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP might be able to diagnose a bone infection without tests.
You might need a blood test, or to go to hospital for:
a scan
a biopsy, where a small sample of fluid is taken from the bone and sent for testing
Treatment for osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis is treated with antibiotics. You may need to stay in hospital to have antibiotics directly into a vein (intravenously).
When you start to get better you might be able to take antibiotic tablets at home.
You'll usually take antibiotics for 4 to 6 weeks. If you have a severe infection, the course may last up to 12 weeks. It's important to finish a course of antibiotics even if you start to feel better.
If the infection is treated quickly (within 3 to 5 days of it starting), it often clears up completely.
You can take painkillers to ease the pain. If the infection is in a long bone (such as an arm or leg), you may be fitted with a splint so you do not move it as often.
Surgery for osteomyelitis
You'll usually need an operation if:
a build-up of pus (abscess) develops in the bone – the pus in an abscess needs to be drained
the infection presses against something else – for example, the spinal cord
the infection has lasted a long time and damaged the bone
If the infection has damaged the bone, you'll need surgery (known as debridement) to remove the damaged part.
Debridement can leave an empty space in the bone, which may be packed with antibiotic dressing.
Sometimes more than one operation is needed to treat the infection. Muscle and skin from another part of the body might be used to repair the area near the affected bone.
Diabetes and osteomyelitis
It's very important to look after your feet if you have diabetes.
If you have poorly controlled diabetes, you can lose sensation in your feet and not notice small cuts, which could develop into an infection that spreads to the bone.
Page last reviewed: 26 October 2020
Next review due: 26 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright