Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Food colours and hyperactivity
Research has found a possible link between certain artificial colours used in food and problems with hyperactivity in children.
If your child is overactive and struggles to concentrate, it might help to cut down on these colours in their diet.
Food colours linked to hyperactivity
All food additives, including artificial colours have an "E number", which means they have passed safety tests and are approved for use in the EU.
According to research by the Food Standards Agency, the 6 food colours most closely linked to hyperactivity in children are:
E102 (tartrazine)
E104 (quinoline yellow)
E110 (sunset yellow FCF)
E122 (carmoisine)
E124 (ponceau 4R)
E129 (allura red)
These colours are used in several foods, including soft drinks, sweets, cakes and ice cream.
Should my child avoid these food colours?
If your child is hyperactive, or has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), there's some evidence to suggest that avoiding these 6 food colours may help.
But it's important to be aware that:
hyperactivity can have many different causes, including genetics, and food colours are probably only a small part of the problem
removing food colours from your child's diet will not necessarily lead to an improvement in their behaviour
the link between food colours and hyperactivity is not completely certain; more research is needed to confirm it
you do not need to avoid all E numbers; there are hundreds of different E numbers and most are not linked to hyperactivity
If you think your child's diet may be affecting their behaviour, it might help to keep a diary of what they eat and how their behaviour changes, so you can see any patterns.
If you notice a possible link between food colours and their behaviour, you may want to see if avoiding these colours helps. But do not make drastic changes to your child's diet without getting medical advice first.
How to avoid these food colours
You can avoid these food colours by checking food labels and looking for alternative products that do not contain them.
All artificial food colours should be included in the list of ingredients, with either their E number or full name.
If any of the 6 food colours mentioned on this page are included, the label must also have a warning saying the colour "may have an adverse effect on activity and attention in children".
If you buy food or drink without packaging, you'll need to ask the manufacturer or the person selling the product if it contains artificial colours.
Page last reviewed: 02 March 2020
Next review due: 02 March 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright