Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Ringworm
Ringworm is a common fungal infection. It's not caused by worms. You can usually buy medicine from a pharmacy to treat it.
Check if it's ringworm
The main symptom of ringworm is a rash. It may look red, silver or darker than surrounding skin, depending on your skin tone.
The rash may be scaly, dry, swollen or itchy.
Ringworm can appear anywhere on the body, including the scalp (tinea capitis) and groin (jock itch).
The rash is usually ring-shaped, but it may look different on your face, neck or scalp.
Credit:
The colour of the ringworm rash may be less noticeable on brown and black skin.
Credit:
Sometimes the rash grows, spreads, or there's more than 1 rash.
Credit:
Ringworm on the face or scalp may also cause patchy hair loss.
Credit:
Other common fungal infections
A pharmacist can help with ringworm
Speak to a pharmacist first.
They can look at the rash and recommend the best antifungal medicine. This might be a cream, gel or spray depending on where the rash is.
You may need to use an antifungal medicine every day for up to 4 weeks. It's important to use it for the right amount of time, even if the rash has gone away.
A pharmacist will tell you if they think you should see a GP.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
ringworm has not improved after using antifungal medicine recommended by a pharmacist
you have ringworm on your scalp – you'll usually need prescription antifungal tablets and shampoo
you have a weakened immune system – for example, from chemotherapy, steroids or diabetes
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How ringworm is passed on
Ringworm is caused by a type of fungi.
It can be passed on through close contact with:
an infected person or animal
infected objects – such as bedsheets, combs or towels
infected soil – although this is less common
Information:
It's fine for your child to go to school or nursery once they have started treatment. Let your child's teachers know they have ringworm.
How to stop ringworm spreading
Do
start treatment as soon as possible
wash towels and bedsheets regularly
keep your skin clean and wash your hands after touching animals or soil
regularly check your skin if you have been in contact with an infected person or animal
take your pet to the vet if they might have ringworm (for example, patches of missing fur)
Don’t
do not share towels, combs or bedsheets with someone who has ringworm
do not scratch a ringworm rash – this could spread it to other parts of your body
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 26 October 2020
Next review due: 26 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright