Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Coughing up blood (blood in phlegm)
Coughing up blood can have lots of possible causes. It could be something serious so it's important to get it checked.
Causes of coughing up blood
Common causes of coughing up blood include:
a long-lasting or severe cough
a lung or airway infection like a chest infection, pneumonia or bronchitis
a problem with your airways that causes them to widen and produce more mucus (bronchiectasis)
Sometimes coughing up blood can be a sign of something more serious like a blood clot or lung cancer.
It's important to get it checked out as soon as possible.
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you've coughed up a few small spots, flecks or streaks of blood, or noticed blood in your phlegm or handkerchief
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E immediately if:
you're coughing up more than just a few spots or streaks of blood
you're coughing up blood and finding it hard to breathe, have a very fast heartbeat or have pain in your chest or upper back
These symptoms could be a sign of a more serious problem like a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism).
Find your nearest A&E
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 29 October 2021
Next review due: 29 October 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright