Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Vitamin B12 or B9 (commonly called folate) deficiency anaemia occurs when a lack of vitamin B12 or folate causes the body to produce abnormally large red blood cells that cannot function properly.
Red blood cells carry oxygen around the body using a substance called haemoglobin.
Anaemia is the general term for having either fewer red blood cells than normal or having an abnormally low amount of haemoglobin in each red blood cell.
There are several different types of anaemia and each one has a different cause.
For example, iron deficiency anaemia happens when the body does not contain enough iron.
Symptoms of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Vitamin B12 and folate perform several important functions in the body, including keeping the nervous system healthy.
A deficiency in either of these vitamins can cause a wide range of problems, including:
extreme tiredness
a lack of energy
pins and needles (paraesthesia)
a sore and red tongue
mouth ulcers
muscle weakness
disturbed vision
psychological problems, which may include depression and confusion
problems with memory, understanding and judgement
Some of these problems can also happen if you have a deficiency in vitamin B12 or folate but do not have anaemia.
When to see a GP
See a GP if you think you may have a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency.
These conditions can often be diagnosed based on your symptoms and the results of a blood test.
It's important for vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia to be diagnosed and treated as soon as possible.
This is because although many of the symptoms improve with treatment, some problems caused by the condition can be irreversible.
Causes of a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
There are a number of problems that can lead to a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency.
These include:
pernicious anaemia – where your immune system attacks healthy cells in your stomach, preventing your body absorbing vitamin B12 from the food you eat; this is the most common cause of vitamin B12 deficiency in the UK
a lack of these vitamins in your diet – this is uncommon, but can happen if you have a vegan diet and do not take vitamin B12 supplements or eat foods fortified with vitamin B12 , follow a fad diet or have a generally poor diet for a long time
medicine – certain medicines, including anticonvulsants and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), can affect how much of these vitamins your body absorbs
Both vitamin B12 deficiency and folate deficiency are more common in older people, affecting around 1 in 10 people aged 75 or over and 1 in 20 people aged 65 to 74.
Treating vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia
Most cases of vitamin B12 and folate deficiency can be easily treated with injections or tablets to replace the missing vitamins.
Vitamin B12 supplements are usually given by injection at first.
Then, depending on whether your B12 deficiency is related to your diet, you'll either require B12 tablets between meals or regular injections.
These treatments may be needed for the rest of your life.
Folic acid tablets are used to restore folate levels. These usually need to be taken for 4 months.
In some cases, improving your diet can help treat the condition and prevent it coming back.
Vitamin B12 is found in meat, fish, eggs, dairy products, yeast extract (such as Marmite) and specially fortified foods.
The best sources of folate include green vegetables, such as broccoli, brussels sprouts and peas.
Complications of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia
Although it's uncommon, vitamin B12 or folate deficiency (with or without anaemia) can lead to complications, particularly if you have been deficient in vitamin B12 or folate for some time.
Potential complications can include:
problems with the nervous system
temporary infertility
heart conditions
pregnancy complications and birth defects
Adults with severe anaemia are also at risk of developing heart failure.
Some complications improve with appropriate treatment, but others, such as problems with the nervous system, can be permanent.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 23 May 2019
Next review due: 23 May 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright