Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Mumps
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Treatment
Complications
Mumps is a contagious viral infection that used to be common in children before the introduction of the MMR vaccine.
Symptoms of mumps
Mumps is most recognisable by the painful swellings in the side of the face under the ears (the parotid glands), giving a person with mumps a distinctive "hamster face" appearance.
Credit:
Other symptoms of mumps include headaches, joint pain, and a high temperature, which may develop a few days before the swelling of the parotid glands.
Important:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
At the moment it can be hard to know what to do if your child is unwell. 
It's important to trust your instincts and get medical help if you need it.
When to see a GP
It's important to contact a GP if you suspect mumps so a diagnosis can be made. 
While mumps is not usually serious, the condition has similar symptoms to more serious types of infection, such as glandular fever and tonsillitis.
Your GP can usually make a diagnosis after seeing and feeling the swelling, looking at the position of the tonsils in the mouth and checking the person's temperature to see if it's higher than normal.
Let your GP know in advance if you're coming to the surgery so they can take any necessary precautions to prevent the spread of infection.
If your GP suspects mumps, they should notify your local health protection team (HPT). The HPT will arrange for a sample of saliva to be tested to confirm or rule out the diagnosis.
Find your local health protection team on GOV.UK
How mumps is spread
Mumps is spread in the same way as colds and flu: through infected droplets of saliva that can be inhaled or picked up from surfaces and transferred into the mouth or nose.
A person is most contagious a few days before the symptoms develop and for a few days afterwards.
During this time, it's important to prevent the infection spreading to others, particularly teenagers and young adults who have not been vaccinated.
If you have mumps, you can help prevent it spreading by:
regularly washing your hands with soap
using and disposing of tissues when you sneeze
avoiding school or work for at least 5 days after your symptoms first develop
Preventing mumps
You can protect your child against mumps by making sure they're given the combined MMR vaccine for mumps, measles and rubella.
The MMR vaccine is part of the routine NHS childhood immunisation schedule. 
Your child should be given 1 dose when they're around 12 to 13 months and a second booster dose at 3 years and 4 months.
Once both doses are given, the vaccine provides around 88% protection against mumps.
Anyone who did not have both doses of the MMR vaccine as a child can contact a GP to arrange to be vaccinated.
Treatment for mumps
There's currently no cure for mumps, but the infection should pass within 1 or 2 weeks.
Treatment is used to relieve symptoms and includes:
getting plenty of bed rest and fluids
using painkillers, such as ibuprofen and paracetamol – aspirin should not be given to children under 16
applying a warm or cool compress to the swollen glands to help relieve pain
Complications
Mumps usually passes without causing serious damage to a person's health. Serious complications are rare.
But mumps can lead to viral meningitis if the virus moves into the outer layer of the brain.
Other complications include swelling of the testicles or ovaries (if the affected person has gone through puberty).
Find out more about the complications of mumps
Who's affected
Most cases of mumps occur in younger adults who did not receive the MMR vaccine as part of their childhood vaccination schedule and did not have mumps as a child. 
Older adults who were born in the UK before the vaccine was introduced are likely to have had mumps as a child. Once you have been infected by the mumps virus, you normally develop a life-long immunity to further infection.
The MMR vaccine was introduced in 1988. Adults born between 1980 and 1990 may not have been vaccinated as children, and are less likely than older adults to have had mumps as a child.
Mumps is currently most common among people born in the late 1990s and early 2000s who missed out on the MMR vaccine as children.
Page last reviewed: 24 September 2021
Next review due: 24 September 2024
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright