Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Nail problems
Nail problems are not usually caused by anything serious. Common nail problems include brittle, loose nails that may change colour or shape.
Your nails may change over time
It's normal for nails to:
become thicker or break more easily (brittle) as you get older
become harder, softer or more brittle during pregnancy (they should be healthier within 6 months of having a baby)
change colour, become loose and eventually fall off after an injury
Fingernails that fall off after an injury should grow back within 6 months. Toenails can take up to 18 months.
Things you can do yourself
There are some things you can do to help with common nail problems.
Do
wear rubber gloves if your hands are often in water or you regularly use cleaning products
clean your nails with a soft nailbrush
regularly apply hand cream to your nails and fingertips
regularly trim your nails (it may help to cut them after a shower or bath)
cut injured, loose nails back to where they are still attached, as this helps them to grow back normally
Don’t
do not cut your nails down the edges, and only trim straight across the top to help avoid an ingrown toenail
do not clean under your nails with sharp objects
do not wear shoes that pinch your toes, especially when exercising
do not bite or pick your nails or the skin around them
do not ignore fungal infections on your skin, such as athlete's foot
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you do not know why a nail has changed shape, changed colour or fallen off
the skin around your nails has become sore, red, swollen and warm (paronychia), which can be a sign of an infection or ingrown toenail
See a podiatrist if:
your nails are too tough to cut or you cannot reach them
Some GPs may be able to refer you to a footcare specalist (podiatrist). You can also pay to see a podiatrist privately.
Find a podiatrist
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Causes of nail problems
Most nail problems are caused by:
injuries or biting your nails
staining your nails, for example, by smoking or applying a lot of nail varnish
not regularly trimming your nails, or cutting them at an angle
your hands often being in water or cleaning products
a fungal nail infection
Nail problems can sometimes be a symptom of a more serious or long-term condition, such as:
nail psoriasis
iron deficiency anaemia
an underactive thyroid or overactive thyroid
diabetes
heart, lung or liver disease
Some medicines can also cause nail problems. Check the side effects of any medicine you're taking.
See pictures of nails that have changed shape
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 12 March 2021
Next review due: 12 March 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright