Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Tailbone (coccyx) pain
Tailbone pain is pain in the bone at the base of the spine (coccyx), near the top of your bottom. There are things you can do to ease the pain, but get medical help if it does not get better after a few weeks.
Check if you have tailbone (coccyx) pain
The main symptom of tailbone (coccyx) pain is pain and tenderness at the base of your spine, near the top of your bottom.
It may feel dull and achy most of the time, with occasional sharp pains.
The pain may be worse:
while you're sitting down
when you sit down or stand up
when you bend forward
when you're having a poo
during sex
during your period
You may also find it difficult to sleep and carry out daily activities.
How you can ease tailbone (coccyx) pain yourself
Tailbone (coccyx) pain may improve after a few weeks, but it can sometimes last longer. There are some things you can do to help ease the pain.
Do
sit correctly – maintain good posture with your lower back supported
use a specially designed coccyx cushion when sitting – sitting on an exercise ball can also help
lie on your side to reduce the pressure on your coccyx
try pelvic floor exercises (particularly important during pregnancy)
use an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel on the affected area for 20 to 30 minutes – you can also use a heat pack for longer
use non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen to help reduce the pain
use a laxative to soften your poo if the pain is worse when pooing – ask a pharmacist for a laxative that softens poo
Don’t
do not sit for a long time
do not wear clothes that are tight around your bottom and lower back, like some types of jeans
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
tailbone (coccyx) pain has not improved after a few weeks of trying treatments at home
the pain is affecting your daily activities
you have a high temperature, tailbone pain and pain in another area, such as in your tummy or lower back
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments for tailbone (coccyx) pain
Further treatments are available if simple things like pelvic floor exercises and ibuprofen have not helped your tailbone (coccyx) pain.
The 2 treatments that may be recommended first are:
physiotherapy – the muscles around the coccyx can be manipulated to help ease the pain
corticosteroid and local anaesthetic injections – into the joint that attaches the coccyx to the bottom of your spine; you'll usually have a maximum of 2 injections given on consecutive months
If physiotherapy and injections do not help reduce the pain, surgery to remove part or all of your coccyx may be recommended.
Causes of tailbone (coccyx) pain
Common causes of tailbone (coccyx) pain include:
pregnancy and childbirth
an injury or accident, such as a fall onto your coccyx
repeated or prolonged strain on the coccyx – for example, after sitting for a long time while driving or cycling
poor posture
being overweight or underweight
joint hypermobility (increased flexibility) of the joint that attaches the coccyx to the bottom of the spine
Sometimes the cause of tailbone pain is unknown.
Page last reviewed: 15 March 2022
Next review due: 15 March 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright