Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Giardiasis
Giardiasis is a tummy bug that causes symptoms like diarrhoea, farting and bloating. It usually goes away in about a week if it's treated, but it can sometimes last much longer.
How giardiasis is spread
There are lots of ways you can catch giardiasis, such as:
drinking water that's not been treated to kill germs
water getting in your mouth while swimming in places like lakes, rivers or swimming pools
eating food that's been washed in untreated water or handled by someone with the infection
touching surfaces that have been touched by an infected person
having sex – especially unprotected anal and oral sex
You can become infected if small bits of poo from an infected person get in your mouth.
Symptoms of giardiasis
The main symptoms of giardiasis are:
smelly diarrhoea
tummy pain or cramps
farting (flatulence)
smelly burps – they may smell like eggs
bloating
weight loss
You can have giardiasis and spread it to others without having any symptoms.
Non-urgent advice:
Call a GP surgery or 111 if:
you have had diarrhoea for more than a week
you have bloody diarrhoea or bleeding from your bottom
It's best to call rather than visit the GP surgery as you might have an infection that can spread easily to others.
Tell the GP if you have recently travelled abroad.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for giardiasis
A GP may send off a sample of your poo for tests to check if you have giardiasis.
It's treated with antibiotics for a few days. Your symptoms should stop in about a week, but they can sometimes last longer.
Important
Go back to a GP if you still have symptoms a week after starting treatment.
They might give you more antibiotics or refer you to a specialist for treatment.
Sometimes the people you live with may also need to be tested and treated.
How to look after yourself if you have giardiasis
Do
drink lots of fluids to avoid dehydration, such as water and squash – if you're well hydrated, your pee should be light yellow or clear
give your baby breast or bottle feeds as usual
wash your hands with soap and water frequently
separate clothing and bedding that may have poo on it from other laundry and wash it on a hot wash
clean toilet seats, flush handles, taps, surfaces and door handles regularly
Don’t
do not drink alcohol while taking your antibiotics – alcohol can react with the main antibiotics used to treat giardiasis
do not prepare food for other people, if possible
do not share towels, wash cloths, flannels, cutlery and utensils
do not use a swimming pool until 2 weeks after your symptoms stop
Important
You're most infectious from when your symptoms start until 2 days after they have passed. Stay off school or work until your symptoms have stopped for 2 days.
A pharmacist can help if you're dehydrated
Speak to a pharmacist if you have signs of dehydration, such as peeing less than usual or having dark, strong-smelling pee.
They may recommend using sachets that you mix with water to help you stay hydrated, called oral rehydration solutions.
Find a pharmacy
Page last reviewed: 01 December 2020
Next review due: 01 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright