Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Oral thrush (mouth thrush)
Oral thrush is usually harmless. It's common in babies and older people with dentures. It can be easily treated with medicines bought from a pharmacy.
Check if it's oral thrush
Adults
Your mouth is red inside and you have white patches.
Credit:
When you wipe off the white patches, they leave red spots that can bleed.
Credit:
Other symptoms in adults are:
cracks at the corners of the mouth
not tasting things properly
an unpleasant taste in the mouth
pain inside the mouth (for example, a sore tongue or sore gums)
difficulty eating and drinking
Oral thrush in adults is not contagious.
Babies
A white coating on the tongue like cottage cheese – this cannot be rubbed off easily.
Credit:
Sometimes there are white spots in their mouth.
Credit:
Other symptoms in babies are:
they do not want to feed
nappy rash
Babies can pass oral thrush on through breastfeeding. This can cause nipple thrush in mothers.
If you're not sure it's oral thrush
Look at other causes of a white or sore tongue.
A pharmacist can help with oral thrush
Oral thrush can be easily treated with a mouth gel bought from a pharmacy. The gel is suitable for adults, children and babies over the age of 4 months.
Ask your pharmacist for advice. Always follow the instructions on the medicine packet.
If you leave oral thrush untreated, the infection can spread to other parts of the body.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your baby is under 4 months and has signs of oral thrush
you do not see any improvement after 1 week of treatment with a mouth gel
you have difficulty or pain swallowing
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How you can prevent oral thrush
Thrush is an infection caused by a fungus called Candida. Some things can make the fungus grow more than usual.
You might get thrush if you're:
taking antibiotics over a long time
using asthma inhalers
getting cancer treatment like chemotherapy
There are some things you can do to help prevent oral thrush:
Do
take care of your teeth: brush twice a day, clean your dentures, and go for regular check-ups even if you have dentures
brush your gums and tongue with a soft toothbrush if you do not have any teeth
sterilise dummies regularly
sterilise bottles after each use
rinse your mouth after eating or taking medicine
go to regular check-ups if you have a long-term condition like diabetes
Don’t
do not wear your dentures at night
do not keep wearing dentures if they do not fit properly – see your dentist
do not smoke
Page last reviewed: 08 July 2020
Next review due: 08 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright