Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Hysterectomy
Contents
Overview
Why it's necessary
Considerations
How it's performed
Recovery
Complications
A hysterectomy is a surgical procedure to remove the womb (uterus). You'll no longer be able to get pregnant after the operation.
If you have not already gone through the menopause, you'll no longer have periods, regardless of your age.
Many women have a hysterectomy. It's more common for women aged 40 to 50.
Why do I need a hysterectomy?
Hysterectomies are carried out to treat health problems that affect the female reproductive system.
These include:
heavy periods
long-term pelvic pain
non-cancerous tumours (fibroids)
ovarian cancer, uterine cancer, cervical cancer or cancer of the fallopian tubes
A hysterectomy is a major operation with a long recovery time and is only considered after less invasive treatments have been tried.
Find out why a hysterectomy is needed
Things to consider
If you have a hysterectomy, as well as having your womb removed, you may have to decide whether to also have your cervix or ovaries removed.
Your decision will usually be based on your personal feelings, medical history and any recommendations your doctor may have.
Find out the things to consider before having a hysterectomy
Types of hysterectomy
There are various types of hysterectomy. The type you have depends on why you need the operation and how much of your womb and surrounding reproductive system can safely be left in place.
The main types of hysterectomy are:
total hysterectomy – the womb and cervix (neck of the womb) are removed; this is the most commonly performed operation
subtotal hysterectomy – the main body of the womb is removed, leaving the cervix in place
total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy – the womb, cervix, fallopian tubes (salpingectomy) and ovaries (oophorectomy) are removed
radical hysterectomy – the womb and surrounding tissues are removed, including the fallopian tubes, part of the vagina, ovaries, lymph glands and fatty tissue
There are 3 ways to carry out a hysterectomy:
laparoscopic hysterectomy (keyhole surgery) – where the womb is removed through several small cuts in the tummy
vaginal hysterectomy – where the womb is removed through a cut in the top of the vagina
abdominal hysterectomy – where the womb is removed through a cut in the lower tummy
Find out how a hysterectomy is performed
Complications of a hysterectomy
There's a small risk of complications, including:
heavy bleeding
infection
damage to your bladder or bowel
a serious reaction to the general anaesthetic
Find out more about the complications of a hysterectomy
Recovering from a hysterectomy
A hysterectomy is a major operation. You can be in hospital for up to 5 days after surgery, and it takes about 6 to 8 weeks to fully recover.
Recovery times can also vary depending on the type of hysterectomy.
Rest as much as possible during this time and do not lift anything heavy, such as bags of shopping. You need time for your abdominal muscles and tissues to heal.
Find out more about recovering from a hysterectomy
Surgical menopause
If your ovaries are removed during a hysterectomy, you'll go through the menopause immediately after the operation, regardless of your age. This is known as a surgical menopause.
If 1 or both of your ovaries are left intact, there's a chance you'll experience the menopause within 5 years of having your operation.
If you experience a surgical menopause after having a hysterectomy, you should be offered hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
Find out more about surgical menopause
The female reproductive system
The female reproductive system is made up of the:
womb (uterus) – a pear-shaped organ in the middle of your pelvis where a baby develops; the lining of the womb is shed during a period
cervix – the neck of the womb, where the womb meets the vagina; the cervix is the lower part of the womb and not separate
vagina – a muscular tube below the cervix
fallopian tubes – tubes that connect the womb to the ovaries
ovaries – small organs by the fallopian tubes that release an egg each month
Page last reviewed: 01 February 2019
Next review due: 01 February 2022
Next
:
Why it's necessary
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright