Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Watering eyes
Watering eyes are common and often get better on their own, but treatment may be needed if the watering affects your daily activities.
Causes of watering eyes
It's normal for your eyes to water in smoky environments or if you're outside in the cold or wind.
An eye injury or something in your eye, such as an eyelash or a piece of grit, can also make your eyes water.
Sometimes watering eyes can be caused by:
an allergy or infection (conjunctivitis)
blocked tear ducts (the small tubes that tears drain into)
your eyelid drooping away from the eye (ectropion) or other eyelid problems
dry eye syndrome – this can cause your eyes to produce too many tears
Bell's palsy – a temporary weakness to one side of the face
some medicines and cancer treatments
Babies often have watering eyes because their tear ducts are small. It usually gets better by the time they're 1 year old.
A pharmacist can help with watering eyes
You can ask a pharmacist about:
what you can do to treat watering eyes yourself – such as cleaning and protecting your eyes
what you can buy to help – such as cleaning solutions, eyedrops or allergy medicines
if you need to see an optician or GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your eyes keep watering and it's stopping you doing everyday activities
your eyelid is turning inwards or drooping away from your eye
you have any lumps or swellings around your eyes
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have any changes to your vision, such as loss of vision
you have severe eye pain
You can call 111 or get help from 111 online.
Treatment for watering eyes
Treatment may not be needed if your watering eyes are not causing problems.
If treatment is needed, it will depend on what the cause is.
For example:
eyedrops can help if your eyes are dry
antibiotic eyedrops can help if you have an eye infection
medicines can help if you have an allergy
anything in your eye, like a piece of grit, can be removed
a small operation may be needed if you have a problem with your eyelids or you have blocked tear ducts
If the GP cannot find what's causing your eyes to water, they may refer you to an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) for tests.
Page last reviewed: 30 September 2021
Next review due: 30 September 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright