Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Diabetic retinopathy
Contents
Overview
Stages
Treatment
Prevention
Diabetic retinopathy is a complication of diabetes, caused by high blood sugar levels damaging the back of the eye (retina). It can cause blindness if left undiagnosed and untreated.
However, it usually takes several years for diabetic retinopathy to reach a stage where it could threaten your sight.
To minimise the risk of this happening, people with diabetes should:
ensure they control their blood sugar levels, blood pressure and cholesterol
attend diabetic eye screening appointments – annual screening is offered to all people with diabetes aged 12 and over to pick up and treat any problems early on
How diabetes can affect the eyes
The retina is the light-sensitive layer of cells at the back of the eye that converts light into electrical signals. The signals are sent to the brain which turns them into the images you see.
The retina needs a constant supply of blood, which it receives through a network of tiny blood vessels.
Over time, a persistently high blood sugar level can damage these blood vessels in 3 main stages:
background retinopathy – tiny bulges develop in the blood vessels, which may bleed slightly but do not usually affect your vision
pre-proliferative retinopathy – more severe and widespread changes affect the blood vessels, including more significant bleeding into the eye
proliferative retinopathy – scar tissue and new blood vessels, which are weak and bleed easily, develop on the retina; this can result in some loss of vision
However, if a problem with your eyes is picked up early, lifestyle changes and treatment can stop it getting worse.
Read about the stages of diabetic retinopathy.
Am I at risk of diabetic retinopathy?
Anyone with type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes is potentially at risk of developing diabetic retinopathy.
You're at a greater risk if you:
have had diabetes for a long time
have a persistently high blood sugar (blood glucose) level
have high blood pressure
have high cholesterol
are pregnant
are of Asian or Afro-Caribbean background
By keeping your blood sugar, blood pressure and cholesterol levels under control, you can reduce your chances of developing diabetic retinopathy.
Symptoms of diabetic retinopathy
You will not usually notice diabetic retinopathy in the early stages, as it does not tend to have any obvious symptoms until it's more advanced.
However, early signs of the condition can be picked up by taking photographs of the eyes during diabetic eye screening.
Contact your GP or diabetes care team immediately if you experience:
gradually worsening vision
sudden vision loss
shapes floating in your field of vision (floaters)
blurred or patchy vision
eye pain or redness
difficulty seeing in the dark
These symptoms do not necessarily mean you have diabetic retinopathy, but it's important to get them checked out. 
Do not wait until your next screening appointment.
Diabetic eye screening
Everyone with diabetes who is 12 years old or over is invited for eye screening once a year.
Screening is offered because:
diabetic retinopathy does not tend to cause any symptoms in the early stages
the condition can cause permanent blindness if not diagnosed and treated promptly
screening can detect problems in your eyes before they start to affect your vision
if problems are caught early, treatment can help prevent or reduce vision loss
The screening test involves examining the back of the eyes and taking photographs.
Depending on your result, you may be advised to return for another appointment a year later, attend more regular appointments, or discuss treatment options with a specialist.
Read more about diabetic eye screening.
Reduce your risk of diabetic retinopathy
You can reduce your risk of developing diabetic retinopathy, or help prevent it getting worse, by:
controlling your blood sugar, blood pressure and cholesterol levels
taking your diabetes medicine as prescribed
attending all your screening appointments
getting medical advice quickly if you notice any changes to your vision
maintaining a healthy weight, eating a healthy, balanced diet, exercising regularly and stopping smoking
Read more about how to prevent diabetic retinopathy.
Treatments for diabetic retinopathy
Treatment for diabetic retinopathy is only necessary if screening detects significant problems that mean your vision is at risk.
If the condition has not reached this stage, the above advice on managing your diabetes is recommended.
The main treatments for more advanced diabetic retinopathy are:
laser treatment
injections of medication into your eyes
an operation to remove blood or scar tissue from your eyes
Read more about the treatment of diabetic retinopathy.
Page last reviewed: 16 December 2021
Next review due: 16 December 2024
Next
:
Stages
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright