Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Umbilical hernia repair
Contents
Overview
How it's performed
Recovery
A hernia occurs when an internal part of the body pushes through a weakness in the muscle or surrounding tissue wall.
Your muscles are usually strong and tight enough to keep your organs and intestines in place, but a hernia can develop if there are any weak spots.
What is an umbilical hernia?
Umbilical hernias are very common in infants and young children, particularly in babies born prematurely.
An umbilical hernia appears as a painless lump in or near the navel (belly button). 
It may get bigger when laughing, coughing, crying or going to the toilet and may shrink when relaxing or lying down.
Credit:
In many cases, the umbilical hernia goes back in and the muscles reseal before the child's first birthday.
Umbilical hernias can also develop in adults. Without treatment, the hernia will probably get worse over time.
For information on other types of hernia, see:
inguinal hernia
femoral hernia
hiatus hernia
What causes an umbilical hernia?
During pregnancy, the umbilical cord passes through an opening in the baby's abdomen (tummy). This opening should close shortly after birth, but in some cases the muscles don't seal completely.
This leaves a weak spot in the surrounding muscle wall (abdominal wall). An umbilical hernia can develop when fatty tissue or a part of the bowel pokes through into an area near the navel.
In adults, factors that can contribute to developing an umbilical hernia include:
being overweight or obese
straining while moving or lifting heavy objects
having a persistent heavy cough
having a multiple pregnancy (such as twins or triplets)
When is surgery needed?
If necessary, umbilical hernias can be treated with surgery to push the bulge back into place and strengthen the weakness in the abdominal wall.
This operation may be recommended for your child if the hernia is large or hasn't disappeared by the time they reach 3 or 4 years old.
You'll usually be advised to wait for your child to reach this age because the operation isn't essential unless there are complications. The risk of your child developing complications is very low.
Surgery is recommended for most adults with an umbilical hernia because the hernia is unlikely to get better by itself when you're older and the risk of complications is higher.
Complications that can develop as a result of an umbilical hernia include:
obstruction – where a section of the bowel becomes stuck outside the abdomen, causing nausea, vomiting and pain
strangulation – where a section of bowel becomes trapped and its blood supply is cut off; this requires emergency surgery within hours to release the trapped tissue and restore its blood supply so it doesn't die
Surgery will get rid of the hernia and prevent any serious complications, although there's a chance of it returning after the operation.
Repairing an umbilical hernia
An umbilical hernia repair is a relatively simple procedure that normally takes about 20 to 30 minutes. General anaesthetic is usually used so there's no pain while the operation is carried out.
In children, the weak spot in the abdominal wall is usually closed with stitches. If the hernia is large or in adults, a special mesh may be used to strengthen the area instead.
You or your child should be able to go home on the same day as the operation. You may feel a bit sore and uncomfortable while you recover. 
You'll need to limit strenuous activities for a few weeks after the operation, and 1 or 2 weeks off school or work is often recommended. Most people are able to return to all their normal activities within a month of surgery.
Read more about:
how an umbilical hernia repair is performed
recovering from an umbilical hernia repair
Are there any risks from surgery?
Complications from an umbilical hernia repair are uncommon, but can include:
infection of the wound – it may appear red, have a yellow discharge and be painful or swollen
bleeding
rupture of the wound
the hernia may return
the belly button may look different
These complications occur in less than 1 in 10 people (less than 10%).
Page last reviewed: 07 August 2018
Next review due: 07 August 2021
Next
:
How it's performed
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright