Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Acute pancreatitis
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Prevention
Acute pancreatitis is a condition where the pancreas becomes inflamed (swollen) over a short period of time.
The pancreas is a small organ, located behind the stomach, that helps with digestion.
Most people with acute pancreatitis start to feel better within about a week and have no further problems. But some people with severe acute pancreatitis can go on to develop serious complications.
Acute pancreatitis is different to chronic pancreatitis, where the pancreas has become permanently damaged from inflammation over many years.
Symptoms of acute pancreatitis
The most common symptoms of acute pancreatitis include:
suddenly getting severe pain in the centre of your tummy (abdomen)
feeling or being sick
diarrhoea
a high temperature of 38C or more (fever)
Read more about the symptoms of acute pancreatitis and diagnosing acute pancreatitis.
When to get medical help
See a GP immediately if you suddenly develop severe abdominal pain. If this isn't possible, contact NHS 111 for advice.
Causes of acute pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis is most often linked to:
gallstones 
drinking too much alcohol
But sometimes the cause is not known.
By reducing how much alcohol you drink and altering your diet to make gallstones less likely, you can reduce your chances of developing acute pancreatitis.
Read more about the causes of acute pancreatitis and preventing acute pancreatitis.
How it's treated
Treatment for acute pancreatitis aims to help control the condition and manage any symptoms.
This usually involves admission to hospital. You may be given fluids directly into a vein (intravenous fluids), pain relief, liquid food through a tube in your tummy and oxygen through tubes in your nose.
Most people with acute pancreatitis get better within a week and are well enough to leave hospital after a few days.
Recovery can take longer in severe cases, as some people can develop complications.
Read more about treating acute pancreatitis and the possible complications of acute pancreatitis.
Page last reviewed: 29 October 2018
Next review due: 29 October 2021
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright