Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Common cold
You can often treat a cold without seeing a GP. You should begin to feel better in about 1 to 2 weeks.
Check if you have a cold
Cold symptoms come on gradually and can include:
a blocked or runny nose
a sore throat
headaches
muscle aches
coughs
sneezing
a raised temperature
pressure in your ears and face
loss of taste and smell
The symptoms are the same in adults and children. Sometimes symptoms last longer in children.
Telling the difference between cold and flu
Important:
Could it be coronavirus (COVID-19)?
If you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, it could be COVID-19.
Get advice about symptoms of COVID-19 and what to do
How you can treat a cold yourself
To help you get better more quickly:
rest and sleep
keep warm
drink plenty of water (fruit juice or squash mixed with water is OK) to avoid dehydration
gargle salt water to soothe a sore throat (not suitable for children)
A pharmacist can help with cold medicines
You can buy cough and cold medicines from pharmacies or supermarkets. A pharmacist can advise you on the best medicine.
You can:
ease aches or lower a temperature with painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen
relieve a blocked nose with decongestant sprays or tablets
Decongestants should not be given to children under 6. Children aged 6 to 12 should take them for no longer than 5 days.
Be careful not to use cough and cold medicines if you're taking paracetamol and ibuprofen tablets. Cough and cold medicines often also contain paracetamol and ibuprofen so it can be easy to take more than the recommended dose.
Some are not suitable for children, babies and pregnant women.
There's little evidence that supplements (such as vitamin C, echinacea or garlic) prevent colds or speed up recovery.
Information:
Call a pharmacy or contact them online before going in person. You can get medicines delivered or ask someone to collect them.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your symptoms do not improve after 3 weeks
your symptoms get suddenly worse
your temperature is very high or you feel hot and shivery
you're concerned about your child's symptoms
you're feeling short of breath or develop chest pain
you have a long-term medical condition – for example, diabetes, or a heart, lung or kidney condition
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because you're having chemotherapy
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Antibiotics
GPs do not recommend antibiotics for colds because they will not relieve your symptoms or speed up your recovery.
Antibiotics are only effective against bacterial infections, and colds are caused by viruses.
How to avoid spreading a cold
Colds are caused by viruses and easily spread to other people. You're infectious until all your symptoms have gone. This usually takes 1 to 2 weeks.
Colds are spread by germs from coughs and sneezes, which can live on hands and surfaces for 24 hours.
To reduce the risk of spreading a cold:
wash your hands often with warm water and soap
use tissues to trap germs when you cough or sneeze
bin used tissues as quickly as possible
How to prevent catching a cold
A person with a cold can start spreading it from a few days before their symptoms begin until the symptoms have finished.
The best ways to avoid catching a cold are:
washing your hands with warm water and soap
not sharing towels or household items (like cups) with someone who has a cold
not touching your eyes or nose in case you have come into contact with the virus – it can infect the body this way
staying fit and healthy
The flu vaccine helps prevent flu but not colds.
See how to wash your hands correctly

Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 04 February 2021
Next review due: 04 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright