Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Phosphate test
A phosphate test is used to measure the level of phosphate in the blood.
Phosphate is a chemical that contains the mineral phosphorus. Phosphates are essential for the production of energy, muscle and nerve function, and bone growth.
Phosphate tests are very useful for measuring phosphate levels in malnourished people (where their diet doesn't contain the right amount of nutrients to meet their body's demands).
A phosphate test can also be used to check for a condition called ketoacidosis, which sometimes affects people with diabetes.
If you have ketoacidosis, your body can't use blood glucose as an energy source because of a lack of insulin (a hormone that controls blood sugar levels).
Phosphate tests can also be used to help diagnose digestive system conditions that interfere with the absorption of phosphate, calcium and magnesium.
Phosphate levels need to be carefully monitored in people with kidney failure.
Read more about the phosphate test at Lab Tests Online UK.
Page last reviewed: 21 September 2018
Next review due: 21 September 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright