Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Whiplash
Whiplash is a neck injury caused by sudden movement of the head. It usually gets better within 2 to 3 months.
Check if you have whiplash
Whiplash most often happens after a traffic accident or a slip or fall.
Common symptoms of whiplash include:
neck pain 
neck stiffness and difficulty moving your head
headaches
pain and muscle spasms in the shoulders and arms
It can take several hours for the symptoms to start after you injure your neck.
Things you can do to treat whiplash
Do
take painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, to help with pain
try to continue doing everyday activities – it might hurt a little but it will speed up your recovery
Don’t
do not use a neck brace or collar to support your neck – this does not help
do not rest your neck for long periods of time
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or call 111 if you have:
severe pain despite taking paracetamol or ibuprofen
tingling or pins and needles on one or both sides of your body
problems with walking or sitting upright
sudden "electric shock" feeling in your neck and back which may also go into your arms and legs
your arms or legs feel weak
These symptoms could be caused by damage to the nerves in your neck or back.
Treatment from a GP
A GP may prescribe a stronger painkiller such as codeine.
If your symptoms do not get any better after a few weeks, a GP may refer you to:
a physiotherapist
a pain specialist
for psychological support
Physiotherapy from the NHS may not be available in your area and waiting times can be long. You can also get physiotherapy privately.
Find a physiotherapist service
Page last reviewed: 13 November 2019
Next review due: 13 November 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright