Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Moles
Moles are small, coloured spots on the skin. Most people have them and they're usually nothing to worry about unless they change size, shape or colour.
Most moles are harmless
Most harmless moles are round or oval-shaped, with a smooth edge
Credit:
Moles can be flat or raised and may feel smooth or rough
Credit:
Sometimes moles have hair growing from them
Credit:
Moles are usually darker on brown and black skin
Credit:
It's normal for:
babies to be born with moles
new moles to appear – especially in children and teenagers
moles to fade or disappear as you get older
moles to get slightly darker during pregnancy
When a mole could be serious
Some moles can be a sign of melanoma, a type of skin cancer.
Signs of melanoma include:
A mole that's changed colour or has more than 2 colours
Credit:
A mole with uneven borders
Credit:
A mole that's bleeding, itching, crusting or raised
Credit:
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you notice a change in a mole
It's important to get a new or existing mole checked out if it:
changes shape or looks uneven
changes colour, gets darker or has more than 2 colours
starts itching, crusting, flaking or bleeding
gets larger or more raised from the skin
These changes can happen over weeks or months.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
If the GP thinks it's melanoma
If the GP thinks your mole is melanoma, you'll be referred to a specialist in hospital. You should get an appointment within 2 weeks.
The main treatment for melanoma is surgery to remove the mole.
Cosmetic mole treatment
Most moles are harmless. Harmless moles are not usually treated on the NHS.
You can pay a private clinic to remove a mole, but it may be expensive. A GP can give you advice about where to get treatment.
Find a private plastic surgeon on the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS) website
How to prevent cancerous moles
UV light from the sun can increase the chance of a mole becoming cancerous. If you have lots of moles, you need to be extra careful in the sun.
It's important to check your moles regularly for any changes.
There are some things you can do to protect your moles from sun damage, especially during hot weather.
Do
stay in the shade between 11am and 3pm, when sunlight is strongest
cover skin with clothes – wear a hat and sunglasses if you have moles on your face
regularly apply a high-factor sunscreen (minimum SPF30) and apply it again after swimming – read more about sunscreen and sun safety
Don’t
do not use sunlamps or sunbeds – they use UV light
Information:
Further information
The British Association of Dermatologists (BAD) has more information about sunscreen and how to stay safe in the sun.
Page last reviewed: 22 June 2020
Next review due: 22 June 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright