Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Boils
A boil is a hard and painful lump that fills with pus. Most boils go away on their own. See a GP if you keep getting them.
Check if you have a boil
A boil often starts as an itchy or tender spot.
Credit:
Boils can sometimes leak pus.
Credit:
Boils can appear anywhere on your body.
Credit:
When lots of boils form together it's called a carbuncle.
Credit:
Things you can do to help boils
There are things you can do to treat boils yourself and stop them coming back.
Do
soak a flannel in warm water and hold it against the boil for 10 minutes 4 times a day
clean the area around the boil with antibacterial soap if pus comes out
cover the area with a dressing or gauze until it heals
bathe or shower every day and wash your hands regularly
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain
wash your towels and bedding at least once a week at a high temperature
try to lose weight if you are very overweight and have boils between folds of your skin
Don’t
do not pick, squeeze or pierce a boil
do not share your towel with other people
do not go to a swimming pool or gym until the boil has gone –⁠ you could pass the infection on to others
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have a boil on your face
you have a boil and a long-term condition such as diabetes
the skin around your boil feels hot and painful
you've had a boil for 2 weeks and the things you've tried are not helping
you keep getting boils
you have a group of boils (carbuncle)
you have a boil and you feel hot and shivery
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for boils
A GP can check if you need treatment.
You may need:
a small procedure to drain the boil to get rid of the pus
antibiotics
Causes of boils
You may be more likely to get boils if you have a long-term condition such as diabetes or HIV.
You may also be more likely to get boils if:
you have close contact with someone else who has boils
you cut your skin while shaving
Carbuncles are less common and mostly affect middle-aged men.
Page last reviewed: 09 September 2020
Next review due: 09 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright