Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Allergies
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
An allergy is a reaction the body has to a particular food or substance.
Allergies are very common. They're thought to affect more than 1 in 4 people in the UK at some point in their lives.
They're particularly common in children. Some allergies go away as a child gets older, although many are lifelong.
Adults can develop allergies to things they were not previously allergic to.
Having an allergy can be a nuisance and affect your everyday activities, but most allergic reactions are mild and can be largely kept under control.
Severe reactions can occasionally occur, but these are uncommon.
Common allergies
Substances that cause allergic reactions are called allergens. 
The more common allergens include:
grass and tree pollen – an allergy to these is known as hay fever (allergic rhinitis)
dust mites
animal dander, tiny flakes of skin or hair
food – particularly nuts, fruit, shellfish, eggs and cows' milk
insect bites and stings
medicines – including ibuprofen, aspirin and certain antibiotics
latex – used to make some gloves and condoms
mould – these can release small particles into the air that you can breathe in
household chemicals – including those in detergents and hair dyes
Most of these allergens are generally harmless to people who are not allergic to them.
Symptoms of an allergic reaction
Allergic reactions usually happen quickly within a few minutes of exposure to an allergen.
They can cause:
sneezing
a runny or blocked nose
red, itchy, watery eyes
wheezing and coughing
a red, itchy rash
worsening of asthma or eczema symptoms
Most allergic reactions are mild, but occasionally a severe reaction called anaphylaxis or anaphylactic shock can occur.
This is a medical emergency and needs urgent treatment.
Getting help for allergies
See a GP if you think you or your child might have had an allergic reaction to something.
The symptoms of an allergic reaction can also be caused by other conditions.
A GP can help determine whether it's likely you have an allergy.
If they think you might have a mild allergy, they can offer advice and treatment to help manage the condition.
If your allergy is particularly severe or it's not clear what you're allergic to, they may refer you to an allergy specialist for testing and advice about treatment.
Find out more about allergy testing
How to manage an allergy
In many cases, the most effective way of managing an allergy is to avoid the allergen that causes the reaction whenever possible.
For example, if you have a food allergy, you should check a food's ingredients list for allergens before eating it.
There are also several medicines available to help control symptoms of allergic reactions, including:
antihistamines – these can be taken when you notice the symptoms of a reaction, or before being exposed to an allergen, to stop a reaction occurring
decongestants – tablets, capsules, nasal sprays or liquids that can be used as a short-term treatment for a blocked nose
lotions and creams, such as moisturising creams (emollients) – these can reduce skin redness and itchiness
steroid medicines – sprays, drops, creams, inhalers and tablets that can help reduce redness and swelling caused by an allergic reaction
For some people with very severe allergies, a treatment called immunotherapy may be recommended.
This involves being exposed to the allergen in a controlled way over a number of years so your body gets used to it and does not react to it so severely.
What causes allergies?
Allergies occur when the body's immune system reacts to a particular substance as though it's harmful.
It's not clear why this happens, but most people affected have a family history of allergies or have closely related conditions, such as asthma or eczema.
The number of people with allergies is increasing every year.
The reasons for this are not understood, but 1 of the main theories is it's the result of living in a cleaner, germ-free environment, which reduces the number of germs our immune system has to deal with.
It's thought this may cause it to overreact when it comes into contact with harmless substances.
Is it an allergy, sensitivity or intolerance?
Allergy
A reaction produced by the body's immune system when exposed to a normally harmless substance.
Sensitivity
The exaggeration of the normal effects of a substance. For example, the caffeine in a cup of coffee may cause extreme symptoms, such as palpitations and trembling.
Intolerance
Where a substance causes unpleasant symptoms, such as diarrhoea, but does not involve the immune system.
People with an intolerance to certain foods can typically eat a small amount without having any problems.
Page last reviewed: 22 November 2018
Next review due: 22 November 2021
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright