Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Learning disabilities
Contents
Overview
Annual health checks
Getting support
Support if you are going into hospital
A learning disability affects the way a person learns new things throughout their life.
A learning disability is different for everyone. No two people are the same.
A person with a learning disability might have some difficulty:
understanding complicated information
learning some skills
looking after themselves or living alone
What having a learning disability can mean
A learning disability is different for everyone. Lots of people who have a learning disability can work, have relationships, live alone and get qualifications.
Other people might need more support throughout their life.
Support for people with a learning disability and family carers
Doctors and other health workers might be able to tell if a person has a learning disability when they are very young. But some people get a diagnosis later in their lives. This can be when they are adults.
If you are diagnosed with a learning disability, you might be referred to other health professionals to get the support you need.
What causes a learning disability?
We do not always know why a person has a learning disability. Sometimes it is because a person's brain development is affected, either before they are born, during their birth or in early childhood.
This can be caused by things such as:
the mother becoming ill in pregnancy
problems during the birth that stop enough oxygen getting to the brain
the unborn baby having some genes passed on from its parents that make having a learning disability more likely
illness, such as meningitis, or injury in early childhood
There are some health conditions where you may be more likely to have a learning disability.
For example, everyone with Down's syndrome has some level of learning disability, and so do many people with cerebral palsy.
Some people with epilepsy also have a learning disability and so do many autistic people.
Profound and multiple learning disability (PMLD)
A profound and multiple learning disability (PMLD) is when a person has a severe learning disability and other disabilities that significantly affect their ability to communicate and be independent.
Someone with a profound and multiple learning disability might have difficulties seeing, hearing, speaking and moving. They may have complicated health and social care needs due to these or other conditions.
People with a profound and multiple learning disability need support to help them with some areas of their life, such as eating, washing or personal care.
Lots of people with a profound and multiple learning disability can still be involved in decisions about themselves, do things they enjoy and be independent.
Some people who struggle with talking might be able to use other ways of communication, like sign language, Signalong, Makaton, or digital systems like picture exchange communication systems (PECS).
Page last reviewed: 10 January 2022
Next review due: 10 January 2025
Next
:
Annual health checks
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright