Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia)
Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia) is a condition where people fall asleep repeatedly during the day; sometimes in the middle of eating a meal or during a conversation.
Check if it's hypersomnia
Excessive daytime sleepiness is different from feeling tired all the time.
If you have hypersomnia, you may:
regularly nap during the day and not feel refreshed
fall asleep during the day, often while eating or talking
still sleep for long hours at night
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you often fall asleep during the day
sleepiness is affecting your life
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will want to find out why you're sleeping excessively. They might:
ask you about possible causes of your sleepiness, such mental or physical health problems, or any medicines you may be taking
suggest you keep a diary of when you sleep
refer you to a doctor who specialises in sleep disorders
Treatment for excessive sleepiness will depend on what's causing it. It may include medicine to help keep you awake.
Causes of hypersomnia
Conditions that may be related to excessive sleepiness include:
Possible causes of excessive daytime sleepiness
Additional symptoms Possible cause
Falling into a deep sleep anywhere, without warning narcolepsy
Loud snorting, breathing and snoring at night sleep apnoea
An unusual feeling in your legs, particularly at night restless legs syndrome
Low mood, little interest in things and feeling irritable depression
Mood swings that range from extreme highs (mania) to extreme lows bipolar disorder
Some medicines, drinking too much alcohol and taking drugs can also cause excessive daytime sleepiness.
Sometimes there is no known cause. This is called idiopathic hypersomnia.
Things you can try to help your sleeping habits
Changing your sleep habits may not cure hypersomnia, but it might help you feel better.
Try to:
go to bed at the same time every night
avoid drinking alcohol and caffeine
create a peaceful sleeping environment
if possible, avoid medicines that can cause drowsiness
avoid working late into the night
It might also help to talk to your family and friends about your excessive daytime sleepiness so they're aware of it.
Page last reviewed: 04 August 2020
Next review due: 04 August 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright