Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Cellulitis
Cellulitis is a skin infection that's treated with antibiotics. It can be serious if it's not treated quickly.
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
your skin is painful, hot and swollen
Early treatment with antibiotics can stop cellulitis becoming more serious.
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Symptoms of cellulitis
Cellulitis makes your skin painful, hot and swollen. The area usually looks red, but this may be less obvious on brown or black skin.
Your skin may also be blistered, and you can also have swollen, painful glands.
You can get cellulitis on any part of your body, such as:
Hands – causing swelling in your fingers or the back of your hand.
Credit:
Feet – sometimes near toes if you have athlete's foot.
Credit:
Legs – usually the lower legs.
Credit:
Eye – which is very serious. The white part of your eye may become red, but this does not always happen.
Credit:
Treatment for cellulitis
For mild cellulitis affecting a small area of skin, a doctor will prescribe antibiotic tablets – usually for a week.
Your symptoms might get worse in the first 48 hours of treatment, but should then start to improve.
Contact a GP if you do not start to feel better 2 to 3 days after starting antibiotics.
It's important to keep taking antibiotics until they're finished, even when you feel better.
Most people make a full recovery after 7 to 10 days.
If cellulitis is severe, you might be referred to hospital for treatment.
To stop cellulitis recurring
Some people with recurring cellulitis might be prescribed low-dose long-term antibiotics to stop infections coming back.
Things you can do yourself
As well as taking antibiotics for cellulitis, you can help speed up your recovery by:
taking paracetamol or ibuprofen for the pain
raising the affected body part on a pillow or chair when you're sitting or lying down, to reduce swelling
regularly moving the joint near the affected body part, such as your wrist or ankle, to stop it getting stiff
drinking plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration
not wearing compression stockings until you're better
You can reduce the chances of getting cellulitis again by:
keeping skin clean and well moisturised
cleaning any cuts or wounds and using antiseptic cream
preventing cuts and scrapes by wearing appropriate clothing and footwear
wearing gloves if working outside
Cellulitis complications
If it's not treated quickly, the infection can spread to other parts of the body, such as the blood, muscles and bones.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E now if you have cellulitis with:
a very high temperature, or you feel hot and shivery
a fast heartbeat or fast breathing
purple patches on your skin, but this may be less obvious on brown or black skin
feeling dizzy or faint
confusion or disorientation
cold, clammy or pale skin
unresponsiveness or loss of consciousness
These are symptoms of serious complications, which can be life threatening.
What causes cellulitis
Cellulitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection.
The bacteria can infect the deeper layers of your skin if it's broken, for example, because of an insect bite or cut, or if it's cracked and dry.
Sometimes the break in the skin is too small to notice.
You cannot catch cellulitis from another person, as it affects the deeper layers of the skin.
You're more at risk of cellulitis if you:
have poor circulation in your arms, legs, hands or feet, for example, because you're overweight
find it difficult to move around
have a weakened immune system, for example, because of chemotherapy treatment or diabetes
have lymphoedema, which causes fluid build-up under the skin
inject drugs
have a wound from surgery
have had cellulitis before
People who are more at risk of cellulitis should treat athlete's foot promptly.
Information:
Social care and support guide
If you:
need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability
care for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled, including family members
Our guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 04 March 2021
Next review due: 04 March 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright