Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Heat rash (prickly heat)
Heat rash is uncomfortable, but usually harmless. It usually gets better on its own after a few days.
Check if you have heat rash
The symptoms of heat rash are:
small, raised spots
an itchy, prickly feeling
mild swelling
The rash often looks red, but this may be less obvious on brown or black skin.
The symptoms of heat rash are often the same in adults and children.
It can appear anywhere on the body and spread, but it cannot be passed on to other people.
Heat rash appears as raised spots that are 2mm to 4mm across. Some spots may be filled with fluid.
Credit:
If you're not sure if your child has heat rash
Look at other rashes in children.
How you can treat or prevent heat rash yourself
The main thing to do is keep your skin cool so you do not sweat and irritate the rash.
To keep your skin cool
wear loose cotton clothing
use lightweight bedding
take cool baths or showers
drink plenty of fluid to avoid dehydration
To calm the itching or prickly feeling
apply something cold, such as a damp cloth or ice pack (wrapped in a tea towel) for up to 20 minutes
tap or pat the rash instead of scratching it
do not use perfumed shower gels or creams
A pharmacist can help with heat rash
Speak to a pharmacist about heat rash. They can give advice and suggest the best treatment to use.
A pharmacist might recommend:
calamine lotion
antihistamine tablets
hydrocortisone cream – though not for children under 10 or pregnant women as they need to get advice from a doctor before using this treatment
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the rash does not improve after a few days
your baby has a rash and you're worried
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Causes of heat rash
Heat rash is usually caused by excessive sweating.
Sweat glands get blocked and the trapped sweat leads to a rash developing a few days later.
Babies often get heat rash because they cannot control their temperature as well as adults and children can.
Page last reviewed: 15 February 2021
Next review due: 15 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright