Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Sciatica
Sciatica is where the sciatic nerve, which runs from your lower back to your feet, is irritated or compressed. It usually gets better in 4 to 6 weeks but can last longer.
Check if you have sciatica
If you have sciatica, your:
bottom
back of your leg
foot and toes
may feel:
painful – the pain may be stabbing, burning or shooting
tingling – like pins and needles
numb
weak
Your symptoms may be worse when moving, sneezing or coughing.
You may also have back pain, but it's not usually as bad as the pain in your bottom, leg or foot.
Information:
You probably do not have sciatica if you only have back pain.
How you can ease the pain yourself
Sciatica usually gets better in 4 to 6 weeks, but it can sometimes last longer.
To help relieve your pain and speed up recovery:
Do
carry on with your normal activities as much as possible
regular exercises for sciatica
start gentle exercise as soon as you can – anything that gets you moving can help
hold heat packs to the painful areas – you can buy these from pharmacies
ask your pharmacist about painkillers (paracetamol is unlikely to help and it's not clear how much NSAIDs help with sciatica)
put a small, firm cushion between your knees when sleeping on your side, or several firm pillows underneath your knees when lying on your back
Don’t
do not sit or lie down for long periods – even if moving hurts, it's not harmful and can help you get better faster
do not use hot water bottles to ease the pain – you could scald yourself if your skin is numb
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if the pain:
has not improved after trying home treatments for a few weeks
is getting worse
is stopping you doing your normal activities
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if you:
have sciatica on both sides
have weakness or numbness in both legs that's severe or getting worse
have numbness around or under your genitals, or around your bottom (anus)
find it hard to start peeing, cannot pee or cannot control when you pee – and this is not normal for you
do not notice when you need to poo or cannot control when you poo – and this is not normal for you
These could be symptoms of a serious back problem that needs to be treated in hospital as soon as possible.
Treatments from a GP
If you have sciatica, a GP may:
suggest exercises and stretches
prescribe painkillers
They might also refer you for:
physiotherapy – including exercise advice and techniques like massage (manual therapy)
psychological support – to help you cope with the pain
Physiotherapy is free of charge on the NHS throughout the UK, but waiting times can be long. You can also get it privately.
Other treatments for sciatica
If your pain is severe and treatments from a GP have not helped, they may refer you to a hospital specialist for:
painkilling injections
a procedure to seal off some of the nerves in your back so they stop sending pain signals
surgery – an operation called decompression surgery can sometimes help relieve sciatica
How to stop sciatica coming back
To reduce the chances of getting sciatica again:
Do
stay active – take regular exercise
use a safe technique when lifting heavy objects
make sure you have a good posture when sitting and standing
sit correctly when using a computer
lose weight if you're overweight
Don’t
do not smoke – smoking can increase your risk of getting sciatica
Causes of sciatica
Sciatica happens when something presses or rubs on the sciatic nerve.
Causes include:
a slipped disc (the most common cause) – when a soft cushion of tissue between the bones in your spine pushes out
spinal stenosis – narrowing of the part of your spine where nerves pass through
spondylolisthesis – when one of the bones in your spine slips out of position
a back injury
Video: What is sciatica?
This animation explains what sciatica is and what causes it.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 3 October 2020
Media review due: 3 October 2023
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 08 September 2020
Next review due: 08 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright