Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Steroids
Steroids, also called corticosteroids, are anti-inflammatory medicines used to treat a range of conditions.
They're different from anabolic steroids, which are often used illegally by some people to increase their muscle mass.
Types of steroids
Steroids come in many different forms.
The main types are:
tablets, syrups and liquids – such as prednisolone
inhalers – such as beclometasone and fluticasone 
nasal sprays – such as beclometasone and fluticasone
injections (given into joints, muscles or blood vessels) – such as methylprednisolone
creams, lotions and gels – such as hydrocortisone skin cream
Most steroids are only available on prescription, but a few (such as some creams or nasal sprays) can be bought from pharmacies and shops.
Side effects of steroids
Steroids do not tend to cause significant side effects if they're taken for a short time or at a low dose.
But sometimes they can cause unpleasant side effects, such as an increased appetite, mood changes and difficulty sleeping. This is most common with steroid tablets.
The side effects will usually pass once you finish the treatment, but do not stop taking your medicine without speaking to your doctor. Stopping a prescribed course of medicine can cause further unpleasant side effects (withdrawal symptoms).
Read more about:
side effects of steroid tablets
side effects of steroid inhalers
side effects of steroid nasal sprays
side effects of steroid injections
side effects of steroid creams
You can report any suspected side effect to the Yellow Card Scheme.
Uses for steroids
Steroids can be used to treat a wide range of conditions, including:
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
hay fever
hives and eczema
painful joints or muscles – such as arthritis, tennis elbow and frozen shoulder
pain caused by an irritated or trapped nerve – such as sciatica
inflammatory bowel disease – such as Crohn's disease
lupus
multiple sclerosis (MS)
How steroids work
Steroids are a man-made version of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands which are 2 small glands found above the kidneys.
When taken in doses higher than the amount your body normally produces, steroids reduce redness and swelling (inflammation). This can help with inflammatory conditions such as asthma and eczema.
Steroids also reduce the activity of the immune system, which is the body's natural defence against illness and infection.
This can help treat autoimmune conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, which are caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking the body.
Page last reviewed: 14 January 2020
Next review due: 14 January 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright