Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Salivary gland stones
Salivary gland stones are small stones that form in salivary glands in your mouth and can block the flow of saliva. They're not usually serious and you may be able to remove them yourself.
Check if you've got salivary gland stones
Most stones appear below your tongue in one of the tubes (glands) supplying saliva to your mouth. You cannot always see them.
Salivary gland stones are white and hard
Credit:
They vary in size, but most are as big as a pea
Credit:
The stones may cause:
dull pain in your mouth that comes and goes
swelling in your mouth that flares up from time to time
an infection around the stone
If you feel intense pain during mealtimes, this could mean the stone is completely blocking a saliva gland. The pain usually lasts 1 to 2 hours.
Things you can try yourself
You can try to remove the stone by doing things to increase saliva production, such as:
sucking on a lemon or lemon drops
drinking plenty of water
gently massaging around the stone
If you have pain and swelling:
take paracetamol or ibuprofen
suck ice cubes or ice lollies
The symptoms will not go away until the stone has been removed.
Do not use anything sharp to remove stones
Do not use a sharp instrument to remove a salivary gland stone because it could cause injury and infection.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you're unable to remove the stone yourself
the stone has caused an infection – signs include pain, redness or pus around the stone, and a high temperature (you feel hot and shivery)
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment to remove the stones
A GP may attempt to gently remove the stone with a thin, blunt instrument.
If that's not possible, you may need to have the stone removed in hospital.
You cannot prevent salivary gland stones
It's not clear what causes salivary gland stones, so there's no way to prevent them.
They're not generally linked with any other health problems.
Salivary stones do not usually come back, but if you keep getting them you might need to have one of your salivary glands removed.
Page last reviewed: 11 November 2020
Next review due: 11 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright