Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Neuromyelitis optica
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO), also known as Devic's disease, is a rare condition where the immune system damages the spinal cord and the nerves of the eyes (optic nerves).
NMO can affect anyone at any age, but it's more common in women than men.
Symptoms of NMO
Each person will experience different symptoms, which can range from mild to severe.
These symptoms may include:
eye pain
loss of vision
colours appearing faded or less vivid
weakness in the arms and legs
pain in the arms or legs – described as sharp, burning, shooting or numbing
increased sensitivity to cold and heat
tight and painful muscle spasms in the arms and legs
vomiting
bladder, bowel and sexual problems
In many people with NMO, the spinal cord becomes swollen and irritated (inflamed). This is called transverse myelitis.
The optic nerve from the eye to the brain can also become inflamed – a condition called optic neuritis.
Some people may only experience transverse myelitis or optic neuritis but, if they have a specific antibody associated with NMO (AQP4) in their blood, they will be said to have NMO spectrum disorder (NMOSD).
NMO-UK ha more information about the symptoms of NMO
NMO relapses
NMO can be one-off or relapsing. Some people may only have one attack of optic neuritis or transverse myelitis, with good recovery and no further relapses for a long time.
But if NMO is very severe, more attacks can follow. A relapse can take from several hours up to days to develop. The attacks can be unpredictable and it's not fully understood what triggers them.
NMO-UK has more information about NMO relapses
When to get medical help
See a GP if you have any of the symptoms of NMO.
The GP will refer you to a neurologist (a specialist in conditions that affect the nerves) for further testing to confirm the diagnosis and rule out any other conditions with similar symptoms, such as multiple sclerosis.
You'll have an MRI scan of your brain and spinal cord, and blood tests. You may also have a lumbar puncture, where a sample of the fluid surrounding your spine is removed using a thin needle and tested.
NMO-UK ha more information about how NMO is diagnosed
Treatments for NMO
There's no cure for NMO, but treatments can help to ease symptoms, prevent future relapses and slows down the condition's progression.
You may be prescribed:
steroids to reduce the inflammation
medicine to suppress your immune system and ease your symptoms, such as azathioprine, mycophenolate or methotrexate
rituximab, a newer type of medicine to reduce inflammation
Rehabilitation techniques, such as physiotherapy, can also help if you have problems with your mobility.
Therapies and support groups are available.
Find out more
Find out more about social care and support
NMO-UK also has more information about treatments for NMO
Causes
NMO is an autoimmune condition. This means the body's immune system reacts abnormally and attacks healthy tissues, causing the symptoms of NMO.
NMO is usually not inherited, but some people with NMO may have a history of autoimmune disorders in the family and may have another autoimmune condition themselves.
Driving
Optic neuritis may affect your ability to drive. You have a legal obligation to tell the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) about any medical condition that could affect your driving.
See GOV.UK for more information about driving with a disability or health condition
Support
NMO can have a significant impact, but support is available to help you have the best possible quality of life.
It might help to speak to others who have the same condition or to connect with a charity.
You may find the following links useful:
The Brain & Spine Foundation
The Brain Charity
Transverse Myelitis Society
The Walton Centre and John Radcliffe Hospital – national centres carrying out research into NMO in the UK
National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service
If you have NMO, your clinical team can pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service (NCARDRS).
The NCARDRS helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat NMO. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Find out more about the register
Page last reviewed: 16 December 2020
Next review due: 16 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright