Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Metallic taste
A metallic taste is not usually serious and can be a symptom of many different things. Treatment will depend on the cause.
Common causes of metallic taste
Possible causes of a metallic taste in the mouth
Cause What you can do
Gum disease regularly brush your teeth, use dental floss, have a dental check-up every 6 months
Taking medicine, like metronidazole speak to a pharmacist for advice – do not stop taking prescribed medicine without medical advice
Cancer treatment, like chemotherapy or radiation therapy eat stronger tasting food like ginger, spices and boiled sweets
Colds, sinus infections and other airway problems the taste should go away once the problem has cleared up
Indigestion the taste should go away after treating indigestion
Being pregnant the taste is usually temporary and clears up by itself
Sometimes, a metallic taste can be linked to a problem with your sense of smell.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the metallic taste does not go away
the metallic taste has no obvious cause
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Page last reviewed: 09 September 2020
Next review due: 09 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright