Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Mastoiditis
Mastoiditis is a serious bacterial infection that affects the mastoid bone behind the ear. It's more common in children.
Most people with mastoiditis recover quickly and have no complications as long as the condition is diagnosed and treated quickly.
Symptoms of mastoiditis
The symptoms of mastoiditis typically include:
redness, tenderness and pain behind the ear
swelling behind the ear that can cause it to stick out
discharge from the ear
a high temperature, irritability and tiredness
headache
hearing loss in the affected ear
The symptoms of mastoiditis often appear after a recurring or severe ear infection.
When to get medical advice
See a GP as soon as possible if you or your child have:
symptoms of mastoiditis
an ear infection that does not get better with treatment or is followed by new symptoms
been diagnosed with mastoiditis and treatment has not helped
Find a local GP service
Causes of mastoiditis
The mastoid bone has a honeycomb-like structure that contains air spaces called mastoid cells.
Mastoiditis can develop if the mastoid cells become infected or inflamed, often following a persistent middle ear infection (otitis media).
Cholesteatoma can also cause mastoiditis. This is an abnormal collection of skin cells inside the ear which may prevent the ear draining properly, leading to infection.
Diagnosing mastoiditis
A GP will examine the inside of your ear with an otoscope (a device with a light and magnifying glass).
If the GP thinks you have mastoiditis as a complication of a middle ear infection, they'll refer you to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist for further examination and tests.
This usually includes a blood test and an ear culture (where discharge from the ear is tested for a bacterial infection).
Some children may need to have a CT scan, which uses X-rays and a computer to create detailed images of the inside of the skull.
Treating mastoiditis
Mastoiditis is a serious infection and should be diagnosed and treated quickly with antibiotics.
You may need to go to hospital so antibiotics can be given directly into a vein through a drip (intravenously).
In some cases, surgery may be needed to either:
drain the middle ear (a myringotomy)
remove part of the mastoid bone (mastoidectomy)
If you're admitted to hospital for treatment, you'll need to stay in for a few days until an ENT specialists can be sure the infection is under control.
After surgery
After surgery for mastoiditis, you or your child will probably need to take 7 to 10 days off work or school.
Take care not to get the affected ear wet. You should be able to wash your hair after about a week, providing you do not get water inside your ear.
You should be able to go swimming around 4 to 6 weeks after the operation, depending on how well your ear has healed.
Your doctor should give you specific advice after surgery and at any follow-up appointments.
Complications of mastoiditis
Although most people with mastoiditis do not experience serious complications, treatment is not always easy and the infection may come back.
If the mastoid bone is severely infected and is not removed, it can cause hearing loss and life-threatening health complications such as:
a blood clot
meningitis
a brain abscess
Page last reviewed: 31 December 2019
Next review due: 31 December 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright