Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z Hand pain
Finger pain
There are many causes of finger pain. You can often ease the pain yourself. But see a GP if the pain does not improve.
How you can ease finger pain yourself
If you see a GP about pain in your finger, they'll usually suggest you try these things:
Do
rest your finger when you can
put an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas) in a towel and place it on your finger for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
take paracetamol to ease the pain
stop or cut down activities that are causing the pain – for example, typing, using vibrating tools for work, or playing an instrument
remove any jewellery on the painful finger
strap the painful finger to another finger next to it – put a small piece of cotton wool or gauze between the 2 fingers and use tape to loosely strap them together
think about using gadgets or tools to make difficult or painful tasks easier – for example, to open jars or chop vegetables
Don’t
do not use ibuprofen in the first 48 hours after an injury
do not use heat packs or have hot baths for the first 2 to 3 days after an injury
do not lift heavy objects or grip anything too tightly
do not stop using your finger completely – after a few days, do gentle hands and finger exercises to help ease any stiffness
A pharmacist can help with finger pain
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take
splints to support your finger and ease pain – flexible rubber splints are available if you still need to use your finger
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
pain in your finger is stopping you doing normal activities
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it at home for 2 weeks
you've noticed a tingling in your hand or your hand is starting to feel numb
you have diabetes – hand problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Immediate action required:
Go to an urgent treatment centre or A&E if you:
have severe pain
feel faint, dizzy or sick from the pain
heard a snap, grinding or popping noise at the time of the injury
are not able to move your finger or hold things
have a finger that's changed shape or colour
have lost the feeling of part or all of your hand after an injury
These might be signs of a broken finger.
Find an urgent treatment centre
What we mean by severe pain
Common causes of finger pain
Finger pain is often caused by bruising or injuring your finger.
Your symptoms might also give you an idea of what's causing the pain in your finger.
Common causes of finger pain and related symptoms.
Symptoms Possible cause
Pain, swelling and bruising, difficult to move finger or grip anything Sprained finger
Pain, swelling and stiffness at the base of your finger that lasts a long time, may be hard to move your finger, may have a lump Tendonitis (de Quervain's disease) or arthritis
Pain, swelling, cannot straighten the end of your finger, often happens after catching your finger on something Mallet finger
Pain or tenderness in your palm at the base of your finger, stiffness, clicking when you move your finger Trigger finger
Ache, numbness, tingling or weakness in your fingers or hands Carpal tunnel syndrome
Sudden, sharp pain, swelling, a popping or snapping sound during the injury Broken finger
Information:
Do not worry if you're not sure what the problem is.
Follow the advice on this page and see a GP if the pain does not get better in 2 weeks.
You can also read about pain in other areas of your hand.
More in Hand pain
Wrist pain
Finger pain
Thumb pain
Pain in the palm of the hand
Pain in the back of the hand
Page last reviewed: 16 February 2022
Next review due: 16 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright