Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR)
Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR), also known as urine microalbumin, helps identify kidney disease that can occur as a complication of diabetes.
If kidney disease is diagnosed early in people with diabetes, appropriate treatment can be given and its effects can be closely monitored.
This means a person's ACR level should be checked as soon as diabetes is diagnosed.
It should also be measured each year, or more frequently, if your ACR level is significantly raised.
If you have a slightly raised ACR level, you may have early-stage kidney disease. A very high ACR level indicates more severe kidney disease. A very low ACR value probably means your kidneys are functioning normally.
If diabetes is well managed, it's easier to control or prevent complications developing, such as high blood pressure, which can sometimes lead to kidney disease.
Read more about treating type 1 diabetes and treating type 2 diabetes.
Read more about ACR at Lab Tests Online UK.
Page last reviewed: 09 August 2018
Next review due: 09 August 2021
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright