Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Hypnotherapy
Hypnotherapy uses hypnosis to try to treat conditions or change habits.
What happens in a hypnotherapy session
There are different types of hypnotherapy, and different ways of hypnotising someone.
First, you'll usually have a talk with your therapist to discuss what you hope to achieve and agree what methods your therapist will use.
After this, the hypnotherapist may:
lead you into a deeply relaxed state – most people feel refreshed and relaxed
use your agreed methods to help you towards your goals – for example, suggesting that you do not want to carry out a certain habit
gradually bring you out of the trance-like state. Most people feel refreshed and relaxed
You're fully in control when under hypnosis and do not have to take on the therapist's suggestions if you do not want to.
If necessary, you can bring yourself out of the hypnotic state.
Hypnosis does not work if you do not want to be hypnotised.
Important
Do not use hypnotherapy if you have psychosis or certain types of personality disorder, as it could make your condition worse.
Check with a GP first if you've got a personality disorder.
Can I get hypnotherapy on the NHS?
Hypnotherapy is not usually available on the NHS.
To find out if you can see a hypnotherapist on the NHS in your area, ask:
a GP
your local clinical commissioning group (CCG)
Finding a private hypnotherapist
In the UK, hypnotherapists do not have to have any specific training by law.
This means hypnotherapy can be offered by people with little training who are not health professionals.
When looking for a private hypnotherapist:
choose someone with a healthcare background – such as a doctor, psychologist or counsellor
if you have mental ill health or a serious illness (such as cancer), make sure they're trained in working with your condition
if you're looking for a therapist for your child, make sure they're trained to work with children
check they're registered with an organisation that's accredited by the Professional Standards Authority
Find a hypnotherapist through the Professional Standards Authority
A private hypnotherapy session can cost from £50 upwards.
Page last reviewed: 10 February 2021
Next review due: 10 February 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright