Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Skin tags
Skin tags are small growths that hang off your skin. They're common and harmless, but can be removed if they're bothering you.
What skin tags look like
Skin tags are small, soft, skin-coloured growths on your skin. They can vary in colour and size – from a few millimetres up to 5cm wide.
Skin tags are usually found on the neck, armpits, around the groin, or under the breasts. They can also grow on the eyelids or under the folds of the buttocks.
They can look like warts, but skin tags are usually:
smooth and soft (warts tend to be rougher with an irregular surface)
knobbly and hang off the skin (warts are usually slightly raised or flat)
not contagious (warts spread very easily, so a sudden outbreak or cluster of growths is more likely to be warts)
Skin tags do not usually cause any pain or discomfort.
Why skin tags occur
Skin tags are made of loose collagen fibres and blood vessels surrounded by skin. Collagen is a type of protein found throughout the body. 
Both men and women can develop skin tags. They tend to occur in older people and people who are obese or have type 2 diabetes.
Pregnant women may also be more likely to develop skin tags as a result of changes in their hormone levels. Some people develop them for no apparent reason.
Skin tags tend to grow in the skin folds, where the skin rubs against itself, such as on the neck, armpits or groin. This is why they tend to affect overweight people who have excess folds of skin and skin chafing.
When skin tags can be a problem
Skin tags are harmless and do not usually cause pain or discomfort. 
However, you may consider having skin tags removed if they're affecting your self esteem, or if they snag on clothing or jewellery and bleed. You'll usually need to pay to have this done privately.
This is because skin tag removal is regarded as cosmetic surgery, which is rarely available through the NHS. Cosmetic surgery is usually only available on the NHS if the problem is affecting your physical or mental health.
Sometimes, skin tags fall off on their own if the tissue has twisted and died from a lack of blood supply.
Removing skin tags
Do not try to remove a skin tag without speaking to a GP first. If you have a skin tag that's causing problems, consider making an appointment with a privately practising GP to have it removed.
Skin tags can easily be burnt or frozen off in a similar way to how warts are removed. They can also be surgically removed, sometimes using local anaesthetic.
Freezing or burning skin tags can cause irritation and temporary skin discoloration, and the skin tag may not fall off and further treatment may be needed.
Surgical removal has the advantage of removing the skin tag completely, but there is a risk of minor bleeding.
If your skin tag is small with a narrow base, your GP may suggest that you try to remove it yourself.
For example, they may suggest tying off the base of the skin tag with dental floss or cotton to cut off its blood supply and make it drop off (ligation).
Never attempt to remove large skin tags yourself because they'll bleed heavily.
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 20 November 2019
Next review due: 20 November 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright