Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Cornea transplant
Contents
Overview
When it is needed
How it is performed
Afterwards
Risks
A cornea transplant is an operation to remove all or part of a damaged cornea and replace it with healthy donor tissue.
A cornea transplant is often referred to as keratoplasty or a corneal graft.
It can be used to improve sight, relieve pain and treat severe infection or damage.
One of the most common reasons for a cornea transplant is a condition called keratoconus, which causes the cornea to change shape.
What is the cornea and what does it do?
The cornea is the clear outer layer at the front of the eyeball. It acts as a window to the eye.
The coloured iris and the pupil (the black dot in the centre of the iris) can be seen through the cornea.
The cornea helps to focus light rays on to the retina (the light-sensitive film at the back of the eye). This "picture" is then transmitted to the brain.
When the cornea is damaged, it can become less transparent or its shape can change.
This can prevent light reaching the retina and causes the picture transmitted to the brain to be distorted or unclear.
How is a transplant carried out?
The type of cornea transplant you have will depend on which part of the cornea is damaged or how much of the cornea needs replacing.
The options include:
penetrating keratoplasty (PK) – a full-thickness transplant
deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) – replacing or reshaping the outer and middle (front) layers of the cornea
endothelial keratoplasty (EK) – replacing the deeper (back) layers of the cornea
A cornea transplant can be carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're unconscious) or local anaesthetic (where the area is numbed and you're awake).
The surgery usually takes less than an hour and, depending on your circumstances, you either leave hospital the same day or stay overnight. 
If surgery involves the transplantation of the outer cornea, the new outer cornea is held in place with stitches, which usually stay in for more than 12 months.
An endothelial transplant (EK) does not require stitches. It's held in place by an air bubble until a few days later, when it naturally sticks to the deep layer of the cornea.
Are there any risks?
As with all types of surgery, there is a risk of complications resulting from a cornea transplant.
These can include the new cornea being rejected by the body, infection and further vision problems.
Most cornea transplants are successful and will work without complications for at least 10 years.
After a cornea transplant
The recovery time for a cornea transplant depends on the type of transplant you have.
It takes about 18 months to enjoy the final results of a full-thickness transplant, although it's usually possible to provide glasses or a contact lens much earlier.
Recovery is usually faster after replacing just the outer and middle layers (DALK).
Endothelial transplants (EK) tend to have a faster recovery time of months or even weeks.
It's important to take good care of your eye to improve your chances of a good recovery.
This means not rubbing your eye and avoiding activities such as contact sports and swimming until you're told it's safe.
Cornea donation
There is a shortage of donated corneas in the UK. Many more people would benefit from sight-saving surgery if more corneas were donated.
Register to become an organ donor
You can also call 0300 123 2323 if you wish to join the Organ Donor Register.
Video: Cornea transplant
In this video, an ophthalmologist talks about the reasons for a cornea transplant, as well as what to expect.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 16 April 2021
Media review due: 16 April 2024
Page last reviewed: 13 July 2021
Next review due: 13 July 2024
Next
:
When it is needed
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright