Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Bedbugs
Bedbugs are small insects that often live on furniture or bedding. Their bites can be itchy, but do not usually cause other health problems.
Check if it's bedbugs
Bedbugs can be dark yellow, red or brown. Adults are around 5mm long.
Credit:
Bedbugs can hide in many places, including on bed frames, mattresses, clothing, furniture, behind pictures and under loose wallpaper.
Signs of bedbugs include:
bites – often on areas exposed while sleeping, like the face, neck and arms
spots of blood on your bedding – from the bites or from squashing a bedbug
small brown spots on bedding or furniture (bedbug poo)
Bedbug bites can be red and itchy. They're often in a line or cluster.
Credit:
Some people have a reaction to the bites. They can be very itchy and there may be painful swelling.
A severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) is also possible but rare.
How you can treat bedbug bites
Bedbug bites usually clear up on their own in a week or so.
Things you can do include:
putting something cool, like a clean, damp cloth, on the affected area to help with the itching and any swelling
keeping the affected area clean
not scratching the bites to avoid getting an infection
You can ask a pharmacist about:
using a mild steroid cream like hydrocortisone cream to ease bedbug bites (children under 10 and pregnant women should get advice from a doctor before using hydrocortisone cream)
antihistamines – these may help if the bites are very itchy and you're unable to sleep
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the bites are still very painful, swollen or itchy after trying treatments from a pharmacist
the redness around the bites is spreading
You may have an infection and need treatment with antibiotics.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How to get rid of bedbugs
Do
contact your local council on GOV.UK or local pest control service – it's unlikely you'll be able to get rid of bedbugs yourself because they can be resistant to some insecticides
wash affected bedding and clothing – use a hot wash (60C) or tumble dry on a hot setting for at least 30 minutes
put affected clothing and bedding in a plastic bag and put it in the freezer (-16C) for 4 days (alternative to hot washing)
clean and vacuum regularly – bedbugs are found in both clean and dirty places, but regular cleaning will help you spot them early
Don’t
do not keep clutter around your bed
do not bring secondhand furniture indoors without carefully checking it first
do not take luggage or clothing indoors without checking it carefully if you have come from somewhere where you know there were bedbugs
Page last reviewed: 21 January 2019
Next review due: 21 January 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright