Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Symptoms
-
Sepsis
Contents
Symptoms
Who can get it
Treatment and recovery
Important
Sepsis is life threatening. It can be hard to spot.
If you think you or someone you look after has symptoms of sepsis, call 999 or go to A&E. Trust your instincts.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if a baby or young child has any of these symptoms of sepsis:
blue, pale or blotchy skin, lips or tongue
a rash that does not fade when you roll a glass over it, the same as meningitis
difficulty breathing (you may notice grunting noises or their stomach sucking under their ribcage), breathlessness or breathing very fast
a weak, high-pitched cry that's not like their normal cry
not responding like they normally do, or not interested in feeding or normal activities
being sleepier than normal or difficult to wake
They may not have all these symptoms.
Find an A&E
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if an adult or older child has any of these symptoms of sepsis:
acting confused, slurred speech or not making sense
blue, pale or blotchy skin, lips or tongue
a rash that does not fade when you roll a glass over it, the same as meningitis
difficulty breathing, breathlessness or breathing very fast
They may not have all these symptoms.
Find an A&E
Spotting sepsis
Sepsis can be hard to spot. There are lots of possible symptoms.
Symptoms can be vague. They can be like symptoms of other conditions, including flu or a chest infection.
Urgent advice:
Call 111 if:
You, your child or someone you look after:
feels very unwell or like there's something seriously wrong
has not had a pee all day (for adults and older children) or in the last 12 hours (for babies and young children)
keeps vomiting and cannot keep any food or milk down (for babies and young children)
has swelling, redness or pain around a cut or wound
has a very high or low temperature, feels hot or cold to the touch, or is shivering
Do not worry if you're not sure if it's sepsis – it's still best to call 111.
They can tell you what to do, arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor, or call you an ambulance.
Contact NHS 111
Sepsis can be especially hard to spot in:
babies and young children
people with dementia
people with a learning disability
people who have difficulty communicating
Information:
Further information on sepsis for people with a learning disability and their carers:
NHS England easy read information on sepsis for people with a learning disability
Sherwood Forest Hospitals video of sepsis information for people with a learning disability
Sherwood Forest Hospitals video of sepsis information for families and carers of people with a learning disability
What is sepsis?
Sepsis is a life-threatening reaction to an infection.
It happens when your immune system overreacts to an infection and starts to damage your body's own tissues and organs.
You cannot catch sepsis from another person.
Sepsis is sometimes called septicaemia or blood poisoning.
Page last reviewed: 18 July 2019
Next review due: 18 July 2022
Next
:
Who can get it
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright