Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Pins and needles
Everyone can get pins and needles but see a GP if you keep getting it or it lasts a long time.
What is pins and needles?
Pins and needles feels like pricking, tingling or numbness on the skin.
It happens when the blood supply to the nerves is cut off. This is usually when you sit or sleep on part of your body. It only lasts a few minutes.
You often get pins and needles in your:
arms
hands
legs
feet
It usually stops when the weight is taken off the body part and your blood supply returns to the nerves.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you constantly have pins and needles
it keeps coming back
Any treatment you might need for pins and needles will depend on the cause.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Possible causes of pins and needles
There are some possible medical causes of pins and needles. If you have other symptoms this might help to find the cause.
But do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes of symptoms
Symptoms Possible condition
Pins and needles, pain or numbness in hands and feet Diabetes
Pins and needles in fingers or toes that change colour Raynaud's
Breathing too quickly, trembling hands, pins and needles Hyperventilation
Pain and pins and needles that travels from your back, down your leg to your foot Sciatica
Pins and needles in different parts of your body Multiple sclerosis
Long-lasting pins and needles may also be caused by:
treatments – such as chemotherapy
some medicines – such as HIV medicine, medicine to prevent seizures, or some antibiotics
toxic substances – such as lead or radiation
poor diet
a trapped nerve in your back or neck
nerve damage – after an injury or illness
drinking too much alcohol
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 18 January 2021
Next review due: 18 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright