Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Symptoms
-
Stomach cancer
Contents
Symptoms
Causes
Tests and next steps
Treatment
Where to find help and support
Stomach cancer is a cancer that's found anywhere in the stomach. It's not very common in the UK.
Credit:
Main symptoms of stomach cancer
There are many possible symptoms of stomach cancer, but they might be hard to spot.
They can affect your digestion, such as:
heartburn or acid reflux
having problems swallowing (dysphagia)
feeling or being sick
symptoms of indigestion, such as burping a lot
feeling full very quickly when eating
Other symptoms include:
loss of appetite or losing weight without trying to
a lump at the top of your tummy
pain at the top of your tummy
feeling tired or having no energy
If you have another condition, such as gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, you may get symptoms like these regularly.
You might find you get used to them. But it's important to be checked by a GP if your symptoms change, get worse, or do not feel normal for you.
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you're being sick for more than 2 days
you have symptoms that you are worried about, but are not sure where to get help
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
problems swallowing
a lump in your tummy
lost a noticeable amount of weight over the last 6 to 12 months without trying
other symptoms of stomach cancer that get worse or do not get better after 2 weeks
a condition that causes symptoms with your digestion that are not getting better after 2 weeks of using your usual treatments
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Important
These symptoms are very common and can be caused by many different conditions. Having them does not definitely mean you have stomach cancer.
But it's important to get them checked by a GP. This is because if they're caused by cancer, finding it early makes it more treatable.
What happens at the GP appointment
The GP may feel your tummy.
They may ask you to give a poo or pee sample, or have a blood test.
The GP may refer you to see a specialist in hospital for more tests if they think you have a condition that needs to be investigated.
This may be an urgent referral, usually within 2 weeks, if you have certain symptoms. This does not definitely mean you have cancer.
Information:
Find out more
Cancer Research UK: seeing a GP about symptoms of stomach cancer.
Page last reviewed: 21 October 2019
Next review due: 21 October 2022
Next
:
Causes
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright