Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Occupational therapy
Occupational therapy aims to improve your ability to do everyday tasks if you're having difficulties.
How to get occupational therapy
You can get occupational therapy free through the NHS or social services, depending on your situation.
You can:
speak to a GP about a referral
search for your local council to ask if you can get occupational therapy
You can also pay for it yourself. The Royal College of Occupational Therapists lists qualified and registered occupational therapists.
Find an occupational therapist
You can check an occupational therapist is qualified and registered with the Health & Care Professions Council (HCPC) using its online register of health and care professionals.
How occupational therapy can help you
Occupational therapy can help you with practical tasks if you:
are physically disabled
are recovering from an illness or operation
have learning disabilities
have mental health problems
are getting older
Occupational therapists work with people of all ages and can look at all aspects of daily life in your home, school or workplace.
They look at activities you find difficult and see if there's another way you can do them.
The Royal College of Occupational Therapists has more information about what occupational therapy is.
Video: occupational therapy
This video explains what occupational therapy involves, who can benefit and the types of help available.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 June 2021
Media review due: 1 June 2024
Page last reviewed: 12 October 2020
Next review due: 12 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright