Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Mucositis
Mucositis is when your mouth or gut is sore and inflamed. It's a common side effect of chemotherapy and radiotherapy for cancer.
Although mucositis is usually painful, it can be treated. It should get better within a few weeks of finishing cancer treatment.
Things you can do to help
If you're having treatment that may cause mucositis, there are some things you can do to help prevent or ease it.
Do
brush your teeth with a soft toothbrush at least twice a day
gently floss once a day if you can
rinse your mouth with warm water (or water mixed with a bit of salt) several times a day
suck on crushed ice or ice lollies
eat soft, moist foods, like soup, jelly or soft fruit, or try adding gravy or sauces to meals
drink plenty of water
chew sugar-free gum (this can help keep your mouth moist)
use a moisturiser or balm to stop your lips getting dry
leave out dentures if you wear them, and keep them clean and moist even when you're not wearing them
Don’t
do not use mouthwashes from shops without speaking to a pharmacist, nurse or doctor – they might irritate your mouth
do not take painkillers without speaking to a pharmacist, nurse or doctor
do not eat crunchy, rough or sharp foods like crisps
do not eat spicy or acidic foods, as these can cause irritation
do not eat hot foods, as these can also irritate your mouth – try eating your meals warm or cool
do not drink fizzy drinks or alcohol
do not smoke
Non-urgent advice:
Tell your care team if you're having cancer treatment and get:
a sore mouth
mouth ulcers
difficulty swallowing, eating or talking
a dry mouth and lips
diarrhoea, bleeding from your bottom, or pain when pooing
These are symptoms of mucositis. They usually begin around 1 to 2 weeks after starting cancer treatment.
Treatments for mucositis
Your care team can offer treatments to ease it, such as:
mouthwashes that clean, numb and protect your mouth
painkillers
sprays or gels to keep your mouth moist (saliva substitutes)
medicines to stop diarrhoea or reduce soreness inside your bottom (rectum)
Talking to others can help
You may find it helps to chat to people in a similar situation or who have had cancer treatment.
Ask your care team about support groups in your area.
You could also try an online forum like:
Cancer Research UK: cancer chat
Macmillan Cancer Support: online community
HealthUnlocked
Page last reviewed: 04 December 2020
Next review due: 04 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright