Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Raynaud's
Raynaud's phenomenon is common and does not usually cause severe problems. You can often treat the symptoms yourself by keeping warm. Sometimes it can be a sign of a more serious condition.
Check if it's Raynaud's
Raynaud's affects your blood circulation. When you're cold, anxious or stressed, your fingers and toes may change colour.
Other symptoms can include:
pain
numbness
pins and needles
difficulty moving the affected area
The skin may turn white or a lighter colour as blood flow is restricted.
Credit:
Sometimes the skin turns blue as blood vessels react.
Credit:
The skin may turn red as blood flow returns.
Credit:
Raynaud's may make your fingertips appear paler if you have dark skin.
Credit:
Some people also find that their ears, nose, lips or nipples are affected.
The symptoms of Raynaud's may last from a few minutes to a few hours.
Raynaud's is sometimes caused by another health condition, taking certain medicines, or working with vibrating tools for a long time.
If you're not sure it's Raynaud's
Things you can do to help Raynaud's
Do
keep your home warm
wear warm clothes during cold weather, especially on your hands and feet
exercise regularly – this helps improve circulation
try breathing exercises or yoga to help you relax
eat a healthy, balanced diet
Don’t
do not smoke – improve your circulation by stopping smoking
do not have too much caffeine (found in tea, coffee, cola and chocolate) – it may trigger the symptoms of Raynaud's
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your symptoms are very bad or getting worse
Raynaud's is affecting your daily life
your symptoms are only on 1 side of your body
you also have joint pain, skin rashes or muscle weakness
you're over 30 and get symptoms of Raynaud's for the first time
your child is under 12 and has symptoms of Raynaud's
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for Raynaud's from a GP
If your symptoms are very bad or getting worse, a GP may prescribe a medicine to help improve your circulation, such as nifedipine, which is used to treat high blood pressure.
Some people need to take this medicine every day. Others only use it to prevent Raynaud's – for example, during cold weather.
A GP may arrange tests if they think Raynaud's could be a sign of a more serious condition, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus.
Information:
Support from SRUK
SRUK is a charity for people with scleroderma and Raynaud's. It offers:
further information and advice about living with Raynaud's
information on how to find support groups
advice about coronavirus (COVID-19) and Raynaud's
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 08 October 2020
Next review due: 08 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright