Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Steroid nasal sprays
Steroid nasal sprays, also called corticosteroid nasal sprays, are anti-inflammatory medicines that you spray into your nose.
They can be used to treat a range of conditions, including hay fever, sinusitis, non-allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps.
Some steroid nasal sprays are available to buy from pharmacies and shops, while others are only available on prescription. Steroid nasal drops are also available.
Common examples of steorid nasal sprays include:
beclometasone
budesonide
fluticasone
mometasone
How and when to use steroid nasal sprays
Steroid nasal sprays can be used as a long-term treatment or just when they're needed.
For hay fever, it's best to use them from 1 to 2 weeks before you think your symptoms will start, as they can take a few days to work.
The leaflet that comes with your spray should explain how to use it and how often. Ask a pharmacist or doctor if you're not sure.
It's important to use your spray regularly, even if you're feeling better. It will only help if it's used every day.
If you miss a dose or take too much
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it's nearly time for your next dose, skip the one you missed.
Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.
Accidentally using too much steroid nasal spray is unlikely to be harmful if it's a one-off. Speak to a pharmacist or doctor if you're worried.
Using a steroid nasal spray too much over a long period can increase your risk of getting side effects.
Stopping treatment
If you've bought a steroid nasal spray from a pharmacy or shop, stop using it when you think you no longer need it. Do not use it continuously for more than a month without speaking to a doctor.
If you're taking a prescription spray, do not stop using it unless the doctor advises you to do so. You may need to reduce your dose gradually.
This can help avoid unpleasant side effects (withdrawal symptoms), such as severe tiredness, joint pain, being sick and dizziness.
Side effects of steroid nasal sprays
Steroid nasal sprays do not usually cause any significant side effects if used correctly and at normal doses.
Side effects can include:
a stinging or burning sensation in the nose
dryness and crustiness in the nose
a dry, irritated throat
an unpleasant taste in the mouth
itchiness, redness and swelling in the nose
nosebleeds
If you're taking a high dose for a long time, there's also a small chance you could get some of the side effects of steroid tablets, such as increased appetite, mood changes and difficulty sleeping.
You can report any suspected side effect to the Yellow Card Scheme.
Using steroid nasal sprays with other medicines, food or alcohol
Some medicines can interfere with the way steroid nasal sprays work, although this is uncommon.
Check the leaflet that comes with your spray to see if it could be affected by other medicines. Ask a pharmacist or doctor if you're unsure.
You can usually drink alcohol while using a steroid nasal spray and you do not normally need to avoid any particular foods.
Who can use steroid nasal sprays
Most people can use steroid nasal sprays.
Ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice before using one if you:
have had an allergic reaction to steroids in the past
have recently had surgery on your nose
have tuberculosis (TB) or an infection in your nose
are having, or have recently had, treatment with steroid tablets or steroid injections into your blood
are looking for a nasal spray for your child (some nasal sprays are not suitable for children)
are pregnant, breastfeeding or trying for a baby
Steroid nasal sprays are normally safe to use while breastfeeding and during pregnancy, but it's a good idea to get medical advice first.
How steroid nasal sprays work
Steroids are a man-made version of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands, which are 2 small glands above the kidneys.
When sprayed into the nose, steroids reduce inflammation (swelling).
This can help relieve symptoms such as sneezing and a runny or blocked nose. It can also help to reduce the size of any swellings (such as polyps in your nose.
Steroid nasal sprays are not the same as anabolic steroids, which are often used illegally by some people to increase their muscle mass.
Page last reviewed: 15 January 2020
Next review due: 15 January 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright