Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Orf
Orf is a skin infection you can get from infected sheep or goats. It most often affects the fingers, hands, forearms or face. It usually clears up without treatment in about 6 weeks.
How you get orf
Orf is a virus that mainly affects young lambs and goats.
You can get it if you have a sore, cut or scratch that touches an infected animal. You're most at risk if you have regular contact with sheep or goats – for example, if you're a farmer or if you bottle feed a lamb.
Orf causes scabs around the animal's nose and mouth, which may spread to their legs and teats. It's not usually serious but is passed easily between animals.
Sheep and goats can be vaccinated against the orf virus. But people can get infected if they come into contact with recently vaccinated or unvaccinated animals.
It's very rare for orf to be passed from one person to another.
Check if it's orf
Orf usually affects the skin on your fingers, hands, forearms or face.
To start with, the affected area of skin is small and may look a reddish-blue colour. It may be itchy or tender.
Credit:
The patch of skin may look darker if you have black or brown skin.
Over a few weeks, the affected area of skin gets bigger and turns into a blister.
Credit:
The blister is usually 2 to 3cm, but it can grow up to 5cm. It may leak fluid before crusting over.
Other symptoms of orf include:
a high temperature
general tiredness (fatigue)
swollen glands on the inside of your elbow or under your arm
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have a mark or blister on your finger, hand, arm or face that has got bigger or not healed after 6 weeks
you have a mark or blister that's painful, red and swollen, and you have a high temperature
you have a rash that looks like a target or "bulls-eye", with a dark centre, surrounded by a paler ring and a darker ring around the outside
you have lots of blisters, or big, painful blisters, or blisters that keep coming back
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatments for orf
There's no specific treatment for orf.
The blister on your skin should clear up in around 6 weeks. Cover it with a waterproof dressing to keep it clean and dry and stop it getting infected.
If it becomes infected, you may need antibiotics.
Rarely, minor surgery may be needed to remove the affected area of skin if it does not clear up by itself.
How to reduce your risk of getting orf
There are some things you can do to reduce your risk of getting orf.
Do
wear latex gloves when touching sheep and goats
cover sores, cuts or scratches with a waterproof dressing, especially when handling sheep and goats
wash your hands with warm water and soap after touching animals
vaccinate sheep and goats against orf
regularly clean and disinfect barns and sheds where livestock is kept
Complications of orf
Orf can affect some people more severely than others.
Your risk of getting complications is higher if you have a weakened immune system – for example, by having a condition like HIV, or a treatment like chemotherapy.
Possible complications include:
a bacterial infection
a rash that looks like a target or "bulls-eye" (erythema multiforme)
a skin condition that can cause large blisters (bullous pemphigoid)
Page last reviewed: 24 February 2022
Next review due: 24 February 2025
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright