Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Bleeding from the bottom (rectal bleeding)
A small amount of one-off bleeding from the bottom is not usually a serious problem. But a GP can check.
Check if you're bleeding from the bottom
You might be bleeding from the bottom if you have:
blood on your toilet paper
red streaks on the outside of your poo
pink water in the toilet bowl
blood in your poo or bloody diarrhoea
very dark, smelly poo (this can be blood mixed in poo)
A small amount of one-off bleeding can often go away on its own without needing treatment.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your child has blood in their poo
you've had blood in your poo for 3 weeks
your poo has been softer, thinner or longer than normal for 3 weeks
you're in a lot of pain around the bottom
you have a pain or lump in your tummy
you've been more tired than usual
you've lost weight for no reason
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
your poo is black or dark red
you have bloody diarrhoea for no obvious reason
111 will tell you what to do. They can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if:
you're bleeding non-stop
there's a lot of blood – for example, you see large blood clots in the toilet
What happens at the GP appointment
The GP will check what's causing your symptoms.
They might:
check your bottom (rectum) with a gloved finger
ask for a sample of poo for testing
refer you to a specialist for tests
Bowel cancer risk
Bleeding from the bottom is sometimes a sign of bowel cancer.
This is easier to treat if it's found early, so it's important to get it checked.
Common causes of bleeding from the bottom
If you have other symptoms, this might give you an idea of the cause.
Do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Bright red blood on toilet paper, streaks on poo, pink toilet water
Blood in poo or blood with slime
Very dark or black blood or poo
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 24 April 2020
Next review due: 24 April 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright