Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Trimethylaminuria ('fish odour syndrome')
Trimethylaminuria (TMAU) is an uncommon condition that causes an unpleasant, fishy smell. It's also called "fish odour syndrome".
Sometimes it's caused by faulty genes that a person inherits from their parents, but this isn't always the case.
There's currently no cure, but there are things that can help.
Symptoms of trimethylaminuria
Trimethylaminuria symptoms can be present from birth, but they may not start until later in life, often around puberty.
The only symptom is an unpleasant smell, typically of rotting fish – although it can be described as smelling like other things – that can affect the:
breath
sweat
pee
vaginal fluids
The smell may be constant or may come and go. Things that can make it worse include:
sweating
stress
certain foods – such as fish, eggs and beans
periods
When to see a GP
See a GP if you notice a strong, unpleasant smell that doesn't go away.
They can check for more common causes, such as body odour, gum disease, a urinary tract infection or bacterial vaginosis.
Tell your GP if you think it might be trimethylaminuria. It's an uncommon condition and they may not have heard of it.
They may refer you to a specialist for tests to check for the condition.
Causes of trimethylaminuria
In trimethylaminuria, the body is unable to turn a strong-smelling chemical called trimethylamine – produced in the gut when bacteria break down certain foods – into a different chemical that doesn't smell.
This means trimethylamine builds up in the body and gets into bodily fluids like sweat.
In some cases, this is caused by a faulty gene a person has inherited from their parents.
How trimethylaminuria is inherited
Many people with trimethylaminuria inherit a faulty version of a gene called FMO3 from both their parents. This means they have 2 copies of the faulty gene.
The parents themselves might only have 1 copy of the faulty gene. This is known as being a "carrier". They usually won't have symptoms, although some may have mild or temporary ones.
If you have trimethylaminuria, any children you have will be carriers of the faulty gene so are unlikely to have problems. There's only a risk they could be born with the condition if your partner is a carrier.
Genetic counselling may help you understand the risks of passing trimethylaminuria on to any children you have.
Treatments for trimethylaminuria
There's currently no cure for trimethylaminuria, but some things might help with the smell.
Foods to avoid
It can help to avoid certain foods that make the smell worse, such as:
cows' milk
seafood and shellfish – freshwater fish is fine
eggs
beans
peanuts
liver and kidney
supplements containing lecithin
It's not a good idea to make any big changes to your diet on your own, particularly if you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy, or are breastfeeding.
Your specialist can refer you to a dietitian for advice. They'll help you make sure your diet still contains all the nutrients you need.
Other things you can do
It can also be helpful to:
avoid strenuous exercise – try gentle exercises that don't make you sweat as much
try to find ways to relax – stress can make your symptoms worse
wash your skin with slightly acidic soap or shampoo – look for products with a pH of 5.5 to 6.5
use anti-perspirant
wash your clothes frequently
Treatments from a doctor
Your doctor may recommend:
short courses of antibiotics – this can help reduce the amount of trimethylamine produced in your gut
taking certain supplements – such as charcoal or riboflavin (vitamin B2)
Support
Many people find living with trimethylaminuria difficult. Feelings of isolation, embarrassment and depression are common.
Tell your doctor if you're struggling to cope. They may recommend seeing a counsellor for emotional support.
Page last reviewed: 16 April 2021
Next review due: 16 April 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright