Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Antifungal medicines
Antifungal medicines are used to treat fungal infections, which most commonly affect your skin, hair and nails.
You can get some antifungal medicines from a pharmacy without needing a GP prescription.
Infections antifungals can treat
Fungal infections commonly treated with antifungals include:
ringworm
athlete's foot
fungal nail infection
vaginal thrush
some types of severe dandruff
Some fungal infections can grow inside the body and need to be treated in hospital.
Examples include:
aspergillosis, which affects the lungs
fungal meningitis, which affects the brain
You're more at risk of getting one of these more serious fungal infections if you have a weakened immune system – for example, if you're taking medicines to suppress your immune system.
Types of antifungal medicines
You can get antifungal medicines as:
a cream, gel, ointment or spray
a capsule, tablet or liquid
an injection
a pessary: a small and soft tablet you put inside the vagina
Common names for antifungal medicines include:
clotrimazole (Canesten)
econazole
miconazole
terbinafine (Lamisil)
fluconazole (Diflucan)
ketoconazole (Daktarin)
nystatin (Nystan)
amphotericin
How antifungal medicines work
Antifungal medicines work by either:
killing the fungus
preventing the fungus from growing
When to see a pharmacist or GP
See a pharmacist or GP if you think you have a fungal infection. They can advise you on which antifungal medicine is best for you.
If you take too much antifungal medicine, call 111 or speak to a pharmacist or GP.
If you're advised to go to hospital, take the medicine's packaging with you so the healthcare professionals who treat you know what you've taken.
Things to consider when using antifungal medicines
Before taking antifungal medicines, speak to a pharmacist or GP about:
any existing conditions or allergies that may affect your treatment for fungal infection
the possible side effects of antifungal medicines
whether the antifungal medicine may interact with other medicines you may already be taking
whether your antifungal medicine is suitable to take during pregnancy or while breastfeeding – many are not suitable
You can also check the patient information leaflet that comes with your antifungal medicine for more information.
Side effects of antifungal medicines
Antifungal medicines may cause side effects. These are usually mild and do not last long.
They can include:
itching or burning
redness
feeling sick
tummy (abdominal) pain
diarrhoea
a rash
Occasionally, antifungal medicines may cause a more severe reaction, such as:
an allergic reaction – your face, neck or tongue may swell and you may have difficulty breathing
a severe skin reaction – such as peeling or blistering skin
liver damage (very rarely) – you may have loss of appetite, vomiting, nausea, jaundice, dark pee or pale poo, tiredness or weakness
Stop using the medicine if you have these severe side effects, and see a GP or pharmacist to find an alternative.
If you're having difficulty breathing, go to A&E or call 999.
Reporting side effects
If you think a medicine has made you unwell, you can report this side effect through the Yellow Card Scheme.
Antifungal medicines for children
Some antifungal medicines can be used to treat children and babies – for example, miconazole oral gel can be used for oral thrush in babies.
But different doses are usually needed for children of different ages. Speak to a pharmacist or GP for more advice.
Page last reviewed: 27 July 2020
Next review due: 27 July 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright