Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Parkinson's disease
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Living with
Parkinson's disease is a condition in which parts of the brain become progressively damaged over many years.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and Parkinson's disease from Parkinson's UK
Symptoms of Parkinson's disease
The 3 main symptoms of Parkinson's disease are:
involuntary shaking of particular parts of the body (tremor)
slow movement
stiff and inflexible muscles
A person with Parkinson's disease can also experience a wide range of other physical and psychological symptoms.
These include:
depression and anxiety
balance problems (this may increase the chances of a fall)
loss of sense of smell (anosmia)
problems sleeping (insomnia)
memory problems
Seeking medical advice
See a GP if you're concerned that you may have symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
They'll ask about the problems you're experiencing and may refer you to a specialist for further tests.
Find out more about diagnosing Parkinson's disease
Causes of Parkinson's disease
Parkinson's disease is caused by a loss of nerve cells in part of the brain called the substantia nigra. This leads to a reduction in a chemical called dopamine in the brain.
Dopamine plays a vital role in regulating the movement of the body. A reduction in dopamine is responsible for many of the symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
Exactly what causes the loss of nerve cells is unclear. Most experts think that a combination of genetic and environmental factors is responsible.
Who's affected
It's thought around 1 in 500 people are affected by Parkinson's disease.
Most people with Parkinson's start to develop symptoms when they're over 50, although around 1 in 20 people with the condition first experience symptoms when they're under 40.
Men are slightly more likely to get Parkinson's disease than women.
Treating Parkinson's disease
Although there's currently no cure for Parkinson's disease, treatments are available to help reduce the main symptoms and maintain quality of life for as long as possible.
These include:
supportive treatments, such as physiotherapy and occupational therapy
medication
in some cases, brain surgery
You may not need any treatment during the early stages of Parkinson's disease, as symptoms are usually mild.
But you may need regular appointments with your specialist so your condition can be monitored.
Outlook
As the condition progresses, the symptoms of Parkinson's disease can get worse and it can become increasingly difficult to carry out everyday activities without help.
Many people respond well to treatment and only experience mild to moderate disability, whereas the minority may not respond as well and can, in time, become more severely disabled.
Parkinson's disease does not directly cause people to die, but the condition can place great strain on the body, and can make some people more vulnerable to serious and life-threatening infections.
But with advances in treatment, most people with Parkinson's disease now have a normal or near-normal life expectancy.
Find out more about living with Parkinson's disease
It may also be useful to read information and advice on: 
planning for your future care needs
assessing your care and support needs
Parkinson's UK
Parkinson's UK is the main Parkinson's support and research charity in the UK.
They can help if you're living with the disease and let you know about support groups in your local area.
You can contact them by:
calling their free helpline on 0808 800 0303 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 7pm, and 10am to 2pm on Saturdays)
emailing hello@parkinsons.org.uk
The Parkinson's UK website features news, publications, research updates and an online community where you can share your experiences.
Information:
Social care and support guide
If you:
need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability
care for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled, including family members
Our guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.
Video: Parkinson's disease - Karen's story
This video explores the effect that Parkinson's has had on Karen's life.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 April 2021
Media review due: 1 April 2024
Page last reviewed: 30 April 2019
Next review due: 30 April 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright