Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Stopped or missed periods
There are many reasons why a woman may miss her period, or why periods might stop altogether.
Most women have a period every 28 days or so, but it's common to have a slightly shorter or longer cycle than this (from 21 to 40 days).
Some women do not always have a regular menstrual cycle. Their period may be early or late, and how long it lasts and how heavy it is may vary each time.
Read more about irregular periods and heavy periods.
Why your periods might stop
There are a number of reasons why your periods can stop. The most common reasons are:
pregnancy
stress
sudden weight loss
being overweight
doing too much exercise
taking the contraceptive pill
the menopause
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Periods can also sometimes stop as a result of a medical condition, such as heart disease, uncontrolled diabetes, an overactive thyroid, or premature menopause.
Pregnancy
You might be pregnant if you're sexually active and your period is late. Pregnancy is a common reason why periods unexpectedly stop. It can sometimes happen if the contraception you're using fails.
It might be that your period is simply late, so you could wait a few days to see if it arrives. If it does not arrive, you can do a pregnancy test to confirm whether or not you're pregnant.
It's important to be aware that you can get pregnant in the days after your period is normally due. This can happen if the release of an egg (ovulation) is delayed – for example, as a result of illness or stress.
Stress
If you're stressed, your menstrual cycle can become longer or shorter, your periods may stop altogether, or they might become more painful.
Try to avoid becoming stressed by making sure you have time to relax. Regular exercise, such as running, swimming and yoga, can help you relax. Breathing exercises can also help.
If you're finding it hard to cope with stress, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) may be recommended. CBT is a talking therapy that can help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and act.
Sudden weight loss
Excessive or sudden weight loss can cause your periods to stop. Severely restricting the amount of calories you eat stops the production of hormones needed for ovulation.
Your GP may refer you to a dietitian if you're underweight, which is when you have a body mass index (BMI) of less than 18.5. A dietitian will be able to advise you about how to regain weight safely.
If your weight loss is caused by an eating disorder, such as anorexia, they may refer you to an eating disorder specialist or team of specialists.
Being overweight
Being overweight can also affect your menstrual cycle. If you're overweight, your body may produce an excess amount of oestrogen, one of the hormones that regulate the reproductive system in women.
Excess oestrogen can affect how often you have periods, and can also cause your periods to stop.
Your GP may refer you to a dietitian if you're overweight, with a BMI of 30 or more, and it's affecting your periods. The dietitian will be able to advise you about losing weight safely.
Doing too much exercise
The stress that intense physical activity places on your body can affect the hormones responsible for your periods. Losing too much body fat through intense exercise can also stop you ovulating.
You'll be advised to reduce your level of activity if excessive exercise has caused your periods to stop.
If you're a professional athlete, you may benefit from seeing a doctor who specialises in sports medicine. They'll be able to give you advice about how to maintain your performance without disrupting your periods.
Contraceptive pill
You might miss a period every so often if you're taking the contraceptive pill. This is not usually a cause for concern.
Some types of contraception, such as the progestogen-only pill (POP), contraceptive injection and intrauterine system (IUS), particularly Mirena, can cause periods to stop altogether.
However, your periods should return when you stop using these types of contraception.
Menopause
You may start missing periods as you approach the menopause. This is because oestrogen levels start to decrease, and ovulation becomes less regular. After the menopause, your periods stop completely.
The menopause is a natural part of ageing in women, which usually happens between the ages of 45 and 55. The average age for a woman to reach the menopause is 51 in the UK.
However, around 1 in 100 women go through the menopause before the age of 40. This is known as premature menopause or premature ovarian failure.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Polycystic ovaries contain a large number of harmless follicles, which are underdeveloped sacs in which eggs develop. If you have PCOS, these sacs are often unable to release an egg, which means ovulation does not take place.
PCOS is thought to be very common, affecting about 1 in every 10 women in the UK. The condition is responsible for as many as 1 in 3 cases of stopped periods.
When to see your GP
See your GP if you're not pregnant – you've had a negative pregnancy test – and you've missed more than 3 periods in a row.
If you're sexually active and you have not taken a pregnancy test, your GP may advise you to take one.
They may also ask you about:
your medical history
your family's medical history
your sexual history
any emotional issues you're having
any recent changes in your weight
the amount of exercise you do
Your GP may recommend waiting to see whether your periods return on their own. In some cases you may need treatment for your periods to return.
You should also see your GP if your periods stop before you're 45 or if you're still bleeding when you're over 55.
Referral to a consultant
If your GP thinks a medical condition might have caused your periods to stop, they may refer you to a consultant who specialises in the condition.
Depending on what your GP suspects is causing the problem, you may be referred to:
a gynaecologist – a specialist in treating conditions that affect the female reproductive system
an endocrinologist – a specialist in treating hormonal conditions
You may have a full gynaecological examination and various tests, including:
blood tests – to see whether you have abnormal levels of certain hormones
an ultrasound scan, CT scan or MRI scan – to identify any problems with your reproductive system or the pituitary gland in your brain
Treating underlying conditions
If test results show a medical condition has caused your periods to stop, you may be offered treatment for your condition.
For example, if the cause is PCOS, you may be advised to take the contraceptive pill or tablets containing a hormone called progesterone.
Read more about the treatment of PCOS.
If the cause is early menopause (premature ovarian failure), this means the ovaries no longer function normally. Hormone medicine is usually recommended. Treatments may include the contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
If you have an overactive thyroid gland, you may be given medication to stop your thyroid producing too many hormones. 
Read more about treating an overactive thyroid gland.
Video: menstrual cycle
This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 21 October 2020
Media review due: 21 October 2023
Page last reviewed: 02 August 2019
Next review due: 02 August 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright