Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Contents
Overview
Treatment
An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a bulge or swelling in the aorta, the main blood vessel that runs from the heart down through the chest and tummy.
An AAA can be dangerous if it is not spotted early on.
It can get bigger over time and could burst (rupture), causing life-threatening bleeding.
Screening for AAA is routinely offered by the NHS to all men aged 65 and over.
Women aged 70 or over, who have underlying risk factors such as high blood pressure, may also be advised to attend screening for AAA.
Symptoms of an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
AAAs do not usually cause any obvious symptoms, and are often only picked up during screening or tests carried out for another reason.
Some people with an AAA have:
a pulsing sensation in the tummy (like a heartbeat)
tummy pain that does not go away
lower back pain that does not go away
If an AAA bursts, it can cause:
sudden, severe pain in the tummy or lower back
dizziness
sweaty, pale and clammy skin
a fast heartbeat
shortness of breath
fainting or passing out
Call 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone else develops symptoms of a burst AAA.
When to get medical help
Make an appointment to see a GP as soon as possible if you have symptoms, especially if you're at a higher risk of an AAA.
An ultrasound scan of your tummy may be done to check if you have one.
Call 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone else develops symptoms of a burst AAA.
Who's at risk of an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
An AAA can form if the sides of the aorta weaken and balloon outwards. It's not always clear why this happens, but there are things that increase the risk.
People at a higher risk of getting an AAA include all men aged 66 or over and women aged 70 or over who have one or more of the following risk factors:
high blood pressure
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
high blood cholesterol
a family history of AAA
cardiovascular disease, such as heart disease or a history of stroke
they smoke or have previously smoked
Speak to a GP if you're worried you may be at risk of an AAA. They may suggest having a scan and making healthy lifestyle changes to reduce your risk of an AAA.
Treatments for an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
The recommended treatment for an AAA depends on how big it is.
Treatment is not always needed straight away if the risk of an AAA bursting is low.
Treatment for a:
small AAA (3cm to 4.4cm across) – ultrasound scans are recommended every year to check if it's getting bigger; you'll be advised about healthy lifestyle changes to help stop it growing
medium AAA (4.5cm to 5.4cm) – ultrasound scans are recommended every 3 months to check if it's getting bigger; you'll also be advised about healthy lifestyle changes
large AAA (5.5cm or more) – surgery to stop it getting bigger or bursting is usually recommended
Ask your doctor if you're not sure what size your AAA is.
Reducing your risk of an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
There are several things you can do to reduce your chances of getting an AAA or help stop one getting bigger.
These include:
stopping smoking – read stop smoking advice and find out about Smokefree, the NHS stop smoking service
eating healthily – eat a balanced diet and cut down on fatty food
exercising regularly – aim to do at least 150 minutes of exercise a week; read about how to get started with some common activities
maintaining a healthy weight – use the BMI healthy weight calculator to see if you need to lose weight, and find out how to lose weight safely
cutting down on alcohol – read tips on cutting down and general advice about alcohol
If you have a condition that increases your risk of an AAA, such as high blood pressure, your GP may also recommend taking tablets to treat this.
Screening for AAAs
In England, screening for AAAs is offered to men during the year they turn 65. This can help spot a swelling in the aorta early on, when it can be treated.
The test involves a quick and painless ultrasound scan to see how big your aorta is.
If you're a man over 65 and you have not been screened, you can ask for a test by contacting your local AAA screening service directly.
Women aged 70 or over with underlying risk factors such as high blood pressure or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease may also benefit from an ultrasound scan. You will need to ask a GP for a referral as women are not currently routinely invited for scanning.
Read more about screening for an AAA.
Video: abdominal aortic aneurysm
This video shows what an abdominal aortic aneurysm looks like.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 5 November 2021
Media review due: 5 November 2024
Page last reviewed: 21 May 2020
Next review due: 21 May 2023
Next
:
Treatment
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright