Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Toothache
See a dentist if you have toothache that lasts more than 2 days. There are things you can do to ease it while you wait for an appointment.
Non-urgent advice:
See a dentist if you have toothache:
that lasts more than 2 days
that does not go away when you take painkillers
with a high temperature, pain when you bite, red gums, or a bad taste in your mouth
and your cheek or jaw is swollen
Do not go to your GP as they will not be able to give you dental treatment.
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E if you have toothache and:
the area around your eye or your neck is swollen
swelling in your mouth or neck is making it difficult for you to breathe, swallow or speak
Information:
To see a dentist in an emergency or out of hours:
call your dentist – if they're closed, their answerphone may tell you what to do
If you do not have a dentist or cannot get an emergency appointment:
call 111 – they can advise you what to do
find a dentist near you – ask if you can have an emergency appointment
You may have to pay for your appointment.
Read more about NHS dental charges.
How to ease toothache while waiting for an appointment
Do
take painkillers, like ibuprofen or paracetamol (children under 16 should not take aspirin) – a pharmacist can advise you
try rinsing your mouth with salt water (children should not try this)
use a pain-relieving gel for your mouth – this can be bought from pharmacies or supermarkets
eat soft foods, like yoghurt or scrambled eggs, and try to avoid chewing with the sore tooth
Don’t
do not eat foods that are sweet, very hot or very cold
do not smoke – it can make some dental problems worse
How to rinse with salt water
Causes of toothache
Toothache can be caused by:
tooth decay
a dental abscess
a cracked or damaged tooth
a loose or broken filling
an infection – this often happens when a tooth (such as a wisdom tooth) has broken the skin, but does not have enough room to fully come through
problems with your braces
How to prevent toothache
The best way to prevent toothache is to keep your teeth and gums as healthy as possible.
To do this:
have regular dental check-ups
cut down on sugary foods and drinks – only have them as an occasional treat at mealtimes
brush your teeth twice a day for about 2 minutes with a fluoride toothpaste
clean between your teeth using floss or an interdental brush every day to remove food, debris and plaque
Information:
More information
Taking care of your teeth and gums
Looking after your children's teeth
Looking after your baby's teeth
Page last reviewed: 04 May 2021
Next review due: 04 May 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright