Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Cushing's syndrome
Cushing's syndrome is a condition caused by having too much of a hormone called cortisol in your body. It can be serious if it's not treated.
Who gets it and why
Cushing's syndrome is uncommon. It mostly affects people who have been taking steroid medicine, especially steroid tablets, for a long time. Steroids contain a synthetic version of cortisol.
Very rarely, it can be caused by the body producing too much cortisol.
This is usually the result of:
a growth (tumour) in the pituitary gland in the brain
a tumour in 1 of the adrenal glands above the kidneys
The tumours are usually non-cancerous (benign). They're most common in young women.
Symptoms of Cushing's syndrome
Symptoms of Cushing's syndrome can start suddenly or gradually. They tend to get slowly worse if not treated.
One of the main signs is weight gain and more body fat, such as:
increased fat on your chest and tummy, but slim arms and legs
a build-up of fat on the back of your neck and shoulders, known as a "buffalo hump"
a red, puffy, rounded face
Other symptoms include:
skin that bruises easily
large purple stretch marks
weakness in your upper arms and thighs
a reduced sex drive (low libido) and fertility problems
depression and mood swings
Cushing's syndrome can also cause high blood pressure, which can be serious if not treated.
When to get medical advice
See a GP if you have symptoms of Cushing's syndrome, especially if you're taking steroids.
Do not stop taking your medicine without getting medical advice.
Lots of things can cause similar symptoms to Cushing's syndrome, so it's a good idea to get checked to find out what the problem is.
Tests and diagnosis
Your doctor may suspect Cushing's syndrome if you have typical symptoms and are taking steroid medicine.
If you're not taking steroids, it can be difficult to diagnose because the symptoms can be similar to other conditions.
If Cushing's syndrome is suspected, the amount of cortisol in your body can be measured in your:
urine
blood
saliva
If these tests show a high level of cortisol, you may be referred to a specialist in hormone conditions (endocrinologist) to confirm or rule out Cushing's syndrome.
You may also need other tests or scans to find out the cause.
Treatment for Cushing's syndrome
Cushing's syndrome usually gets better with treatment, although it might take a long time to recover completely.
Treatment depends on what's causing it.
If it's caused by taking steroids:
your steroid dose will be gradually reduced or stopped
If it's caused by a tumour, treatment may include:
surgery to remove the tumour
radiotherapy to destroy the tumour
medicines to reduce the effect of cortisol on your body
Speak to your doctor about the benefits and risks of the different treatment options.
More information
Read more about Cushing's syndrome and the main treatments from the Pituitary Foundation
Page last reviewed: 25 March 2021
Next review due: 25 March 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright