Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
What is Down's syndrome?
-
Down's syndrome
Contents
What is Down's syndrome?
Advice for new parents
How to help children and young people
Support for adults
Support for families and carers
Other health conditions
Down's syndrome is when you're born with an extra chromosome.
You usually get an extra chromosome by chance, because of a change in the sperm or egg before you're born.
This change does not happen because of anything anyone did before or during pregnancy.
What it's like to have Down's syndrome
People with Down's syndrome will have some level of learning disability. This means they'll have a range of abilities.
Some people will be more independent and do things like get a job. Other people might need more regular care.
But, like everyone, people with Down's syndrome have:
their own personalities
things they like and dislike
things that make them who they are
Having a child with Down's syndrome
3 families share their experience of having a child with Down's syndrome
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 18 March 2022
Media review due: 18 March 2025
Having a baby with Down's syndrome
In almost all cases, Down's syndrome does not run in families.
Your chance of having a baby with Down's syndrome increases as you get older, but anyone can have a baby with Down's syndrome.
Speak to a GP if you want to find out more. They may be able to refer you to a genetic counsellor.
Screening
If you're pregnant you'll be offered a screening test to find out your chance of having a baby with Down’s syndrome.
You can have the test at your dating scan (around 11 to 14 weeks).
If you have a higher chance, you can have further tests.
Important
It's your choice whether or not to have any screening tests.
Information:
Find out more about screening:
NHS website – what to do if screening finds something
Down's Syndrome Association – frequently asked prenatal questions
Page last reviewed: 21 October 2019
Next review due: 21 October 2022
Next
:
Advice for new parents
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright