Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Dupuytren's contracture
Dupuytren's contracture is when 1 or more fingers bend in towards your palm. There's no cure, but your fingers can be straightened if it's severe.
Check if you have Dupuytren's contracture
Dupuytren's contracture mainly affects the ring and little fingers. You can have it in both hands at the same time.
It tends to get slowly worse over many months or years. Treatment cannot usually help in the early stages.
It starts with lumps, dimples or ridges on your palm.
Credit:
Eventually, your finger may get stuck in a bent position.
Credit:
If you're not sure it's Dupuytren's contracture
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if 1 or more of your fingers are bent and:
you cannot put your hand down flat
you're having difficulty with daily activities
You'll probably be offered treatment. The GP may refer you to a surgeon to discuss your options.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Information:
You can ask to be referred to a hospital of your choice.
Find and compare hospitals for Dupuytren's contracture
Treatments for Dupuytren's contracture
Speak to a specialist about the options, what the benefits and risks are, and what to expect afterwards.
Your finger may not be completely straight after treatment, and might not be as strong and flexible as it used to be.
The contracture could also come back after a few years.
There are 3 main types of treatment.
Surgery to straighten the fingers
Fasciectomy
A cut is made along your palm and finger so the surgeon can straighten it.
general anaesthetic (you're asleep) or local anaesthetic (your hand is numbed)
you can leave hospital the same day
recovery time: 4 to 12 weeks
lowest risk of contracture coming back
risks include bleeding, numbness and infection
Using a needle to straighten the fingers
Needle fasciotomy
A needle is inserted into several places along your palm and finger to loosen and straighten it.
local anaesthetic (your hand is numbed)
you can leave hospital the same day
recovery time: up to 2 weeks
contracture more likely to come back than with surgery
risks include a cut opening up in your skin, pain and numbness
Using surgery and a skin graft to straighten the fingers
Dermafasciectomy
Similar to a fasciectomy, except an additional area of skin is removed; a skin graft from elsewhere in the body can be used to replace the removed skin.
general anaesthetic (you're asleep) or local anaesthetic (your hand is numbed)
2 procedures are needed – 1 to straighten the fingers and then around 4 days later, another procedure to add the skin graft
contractures less likely to come back than with a standard fasciectomy but recovery times can be longer
risks include bleeding, numbness and infection
Causes and preventing Dupuytren's contracture
Dupuytren's contracture happens when the tissue under the skin near your fingers becomes thicker and less flexible.
The exact cause is unknown, but it's been linked to:
having a family history of the condition
smoking
drinking lots of alcohol
having diabetes or epilepsy
It's not known if you can prevent it or stop it coming back.
Page last reviewed: 15 June 2021
Next review due: 15 June 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright