Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complications
Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Acute leukaemia means it progresses quickly and aggressively, and usually requires immediate treatment.
Acute leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells affected.
The 2 main types of white blood cells are:
lymphocytes – which fight viral infections
myeloid cells – which do different things, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage
This topic focuses on acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), which is an aggressive cancer of the myeloid cells.
The following types of leukaemia are covered separately:
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
chronic myeloid leukaemia
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and cancer:
Macmillan: Coronavirus guidance for people with cancer
Cancer Research UK: Coronavirus and cancer
Symptoms of AML
The symptoms of AML usually develop over a few weeks and become worse over time.
Symptoms can include:
looking pale or "washed out"
feeling tired or weak
breathlessness
frequent infections
unusual and frequent bruising or bleeding, such as bleeding gums or nosebleeds
losing weight without trying to
Seeking medical advice
Speak to a GP if you or your child have possible symptoms of AML.
Although it's highly unlikely that leukaemia is the cause, these symptoms should be investigated.
If your GP thinks you may have leukaemia, they'll arrange blood tests to check your blood cell production.
If the tests suggest there's a problem, you'll be urgently referred to a specialist in treating blood conditions (haematologist) for further tests and treatment.
Find out more about diagnosing AML
What causes AML?
It's not clear exactly what causes AML and, in most cases, there's no identifiable cause.
But some things can increase your risk of getting AML, including:
previous chemotherapy or radiotherapy
exposure to very high levels of radiation (including previous radiotherapy treatment)
smoking and other exposure to benzene, a chemical used in manufacturing that's also found in cigarette smoke
having a blood disorder or some genetic conditions, such as Down's syndrome
Find out more about the causes of AML
Who's affected
AML is a rare type of cancer, with around 3,100 people diagnosed with it each year in the UK.
The risk of developing AML increases with age. It's most common in people over 75.
How AML is treated
Treatment for AML needs to begin as soon as possible, as it can develop quickly.
Chemotherapy is the main treatment for AML. It's used to kill as many leukaemia cells in your body as possible and reduce the risk of the condition coming back (relapsing).
In some cases, intensive chemotherapy and radiotherapy may be needed, in combination with a bone marrow or stem cell transplant.
Find out more about treating AML
Help and support
There are organisations that offer information, advice and support if you or a family member has been diagnosed with AML.
These include:
Leukaemia Care – you can also call their freephone helpline on 08088 010 444, or email support@leukaemiacare.org.uk
Cancer Research UK
Macmillan Cancer Support
Page last reviewed: 28 February 2019
Next review due: 28 February 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright