Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis)
Excessive sweating is common and can affect the whole body or just certain areas. Sometimes it gets better with age but there are things you can do and treatments that can help.
What is excessive sweating?
It's normal to sweat if you get hot or do exercise, but you may be sweating excessively if you're sweating when your body does not need to cool down.
Excessive sweating can happen for no obvious reason, because of another condition you may have or as a side effect of a medicine you're taking.
Things you can do to help with excessive sweating
Do
wear loose-fitting clothes to minimise signs of sweating
wear socks that absorb moisture and change your socks at least twice a day if possible
wear leather shoes and try to wear different shoes day to day
Don’t
do not wear tight clothes or synthetic fabrics – for example, nylon
do not wear enclosed boots or sports shoes that may cause your feet to sweat more
do not do things that might make your sweating worse – for example, drinking alcohol or eating spicy food
A pharmacist can help with excessive sweating
You can see a pharmacist about excessive sweating. You can buy things without a prescription, such as:
stronger antiperspirants instead of deodorant
armpit or sweat shields to protect your clothing
foot powders for sweaty feet
soap substitutes that are more gentle on your skin
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you're sweating excessively and:
things you can do yourself are not helping
it's lasted for at least 6 months
it stops you from getting on with your daily activities
it happens at least once a week
it happens at night (you're having night sweats)
you have a family history of excessive sweating
you're taking medicine for another condition
The GP may refer you for tests if they think another condition may be causing your sweating.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treating severe excessive sweating
If there's no obvious cause for your sweating, and nothing seems to be helping, then you may be referred to a specialist (dermatologist).
They may recommend other treatments that you can try, such as:
taking tablets that reduce sweating
treating the areas with a weak electric current passed through water or on a wet pad (iontophoresis)
having botox injections for sweating under the armpits (this may not be available on the NHS)
surgery – for example, removal of the sweat glands
Visit Hyperhidrosis UK for more information on available treatments.
If your sweating is caused by another condition, any treatment you may need will depend on what's causing it.
Page last reviewed: 11 January 2021
Next review due: 10 January 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright