Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Angiography
Contents
Overview
What happens
Risks
Angiography is a type of X-ray used to check blood vessels.
Blood vessels do not show clearly on a normal X-ray, so a special dye needs to be injected into your blood first.
This highlights your blood vessels, allowing your doctor to see any problems.
The X-ray images created during angiography are called angiograms.
Why angiography is used
Angiography is used to check the health of your blood vessels and how blood flows through them.
It can help to diagnose or investigate several problems affecting blood vessels, including:
atherosclerosis – narrowing of the arteries, which could mean you're at risk of having a stroke or heart attack
peripheral arterial disease – reduced blood supply to the leg muscles
a brain aneurysm – a bulge in a blood vessel in your brain
angina – chest pain caused by reduced blood flow to the heart muscles
blood clots or a pulmonary embolism – a blockage in the artery supplying your lungs
a blockage in the blood supply to your kidneys
Angiography may also be used to help plan treatment for some of these conditions.
What happens during angiography
Angiography is done in a hospital X-ray or radiology department.
For the test:
you'll usually be awake, but may be given a medicine called a sedative to help you relax
you lie on an X-ray table and a small cut (incision) is made over 1 of your arteries, usually near your groin or wrist – local anaesthetic is used to numb the area where the cut is made
a very thin flexible tube (catheter) is inserted into the artery
the catheter is carefully guided to the area that's being examined (such as the heart)
a dye (contrast medium) is injected into the catheter
a series of X-rays are taken as the dye flows through your blood vessels
The test can take between 30 minutes and 2 hours. You'll usually be able to go home a few hours afterwards.
Read more about what happens before, during and after angiography.
Risks of angiography
Angiography is generally a safe and painless procedure.
But for a few days or weeks afterwards it's common to have:
bruising
soreness
a very small lump or collection of blood near where the cut was made
There's also a very small risk of more serious complications, such as an allergic reaction to the dye, a stroke or a heart attack.
Read more about the risks of angiography.
Types of angiography
There are several different types of angiography, depending on which part of the body is being looked at.
Common types include:
coronary angiography – to check the heart and nearby blood vessels
cerebral angiography – to check the blood vessels in and around the brain
pulmonary angiography – to check the blood vessels supplying the lungs
renal angiography – to check the blood vessels supplying the kidneys
Occasionally, angiography may be done using scans instead of X-rays. These are called CT angiography or MRI angiography.
There's also a type of angiography that's used to check the eyes, called fluorescein angiography. It's different to the other types of angiography and is not covered in this topic.
Page last reviewed: 16 January 2020
Next review due: 16 January 2023
Next
:
What happens
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright