Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Complex regional pain syndrome
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a poorly understood condition where a person experiences persistent severe and debilitating pain.
Although most cases of CRPS are triggered by an injury, the resulting pain is much more severe and long-lasting than normal.
The pain usually only affects 1 limb, but it can sometimes spread to other parts of the body.
The skin of the affected body part can become so sensitive that a slight touch, bump or even a change in temperature can cause intense pain.
Affected areas can also become swollen, stiff or undergo fluctuating changes in colour or temperature.
CRPS often gradually improves over time. But some people with CRPS experience pain for many years.
Find out more about the symptoms of CRPS.
When to get medical advice
You should see a GP if you have persistent pain that's preventing you from carrying out everyday activities.
Diagnosing CRPS can be difficult because it involves having tests to rule out other possible causes.
It's best to get help as soon as possible, as early treatment may help reduce your painful symptoms.
Find out more about diagnosing CRPS.
Causes of CRPS
The cause of CRPS is unknown, but it's thought to be the result of the body reacting abnormally to an injury.
It used to be thought that CRPS was a psychosomatic condition, where the symptoms are "all in the mind", but research has disproved this.
Find out more about the possible causes of CRPS.
Who's affected
It's difficult to estimate exactly how common CRPS is, as many cases may go undiagnosed or be misdiagnosed. But it's thought to be fairly uncommon.
CRPS can affect people of any age, including children. But it tends to be more common in women who are 60 to 70 years of age.
Treating CRPS
There's currently no cure for CRPS, but there are a number of treatments that can help manage the symptoms.
There are 4 main types of treatment:
education and self-management – being given clear information about your condition and advice on any steps you can take to help manage it yourself
physical rehabilitation – treatment to help manage your symptoms and reduce the risk of long-term physical problems, such as physiotherapy exercises
pain relief – treatments to help reduce your pain, such as anticonvulsants or antidepressants
psychological support – treatments to help you cope with the emotional impact of living with CRPS, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
Because of the complex nature of CRPS, a number of different healthcare professionals will usually be involved in your care.
Find out more about treating CRPS.
Page last reviewed: 29 April 2019
Next review due: 29 April 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright