Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Sore or dry lips
Dry or sore lips are a common problem, especially during hot or cold weather. There are things you can try yourself that may help.
Things you can try if you have sore or dry lips
Do
use a lip balm containing petroleum jelly or beeswax – you can buy these at a pharmacy or supermarket
try a few different lip balms if one is not working for you – some people may be sensitive to some fragrances, dyes or cosmetic ingredients
wash your hands before applying lip balm
use a lip balm with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 15 or more every 2 hours when outdoors
cover your lips with a scarf when you're outside in cold weather
drink plenty of water to avoid becoming dehydrated
Don’t
do not pick or bite any flaky skin on your lips – this can slow down healing
do not keep licking dry or cracked lips – this can make them sore
do not share lip balms with other people – this can spread germs
A pharmacist can help with sore or dry lips
A pharmacist can advise you about:
the best treatments for dry or sore lips
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your lips are hot, painful and swollen – this could be a sign of infection
If your GP thinks you have an infected lip, they may prescribe an antibiotic or antifungal cream to treat the problem.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Common causes of sore or dry lips
Sore or dry lips can be caused by many things.
Common causes include:
cold weather, dry air or wind
damage from the sun
dehydration
a lip injury
allergies
Sometimes they can be caused by a lack of vitamins and minerals.
If you have a small, fluid-filled blister on your lip, you may have a cold sore.
Most people with cold sores get a tingling, burning or itching feeling on their lip before the blister appears.
Page last reviewed: 23 December 2021
Next review due: 23 December 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright