Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Endocarditis
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
Endocarditis is a rare and potentially fatal infection of the inner lining of the heart (the endocardium). It's most commonly caused by bacteria entering the blood and travelling to the heart.
Although the heart is usually well protected against infection, it may be easier for bacteria to bypass the immune system in people who have:
an artificial (prosthetic) heart valve – valve replacement surgery is increasingly being used when people experience narrowing of one of their heart valves
congenital heart disease – where a person is born with heart defects
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy – where the heart muscle cells have enlarged and the walls of the heart chambers thicken
damaged heart valves – because of infection or heart disease
People who inject drugs are also more likely to develop endocarditis.
Find out more about the causes of endocarditis
Symptoms of endocarditis
The initial symptoms of endocarditis are similar to flu and include:
a high temperature
chills
headache
joint and muscle pain
Without treatment, the infection damages the heart valves and disrupts the normal flow of blood through the heart.
This triggers a range of life-threatening complications, such as:
heart failure – where the heart is unable to pump enough blood around the body to properly meet the body's demands
stroke – where the supply of blood to the brain becomes disrupted
Find out more about the symptoms of endocarditis
Treating endocarditis
Endocarditis is treated with a course of antibiotics given via a drip. You'll need to be admitted to hospital for this.
Some people also need surgery to repair or replace a damaged heart valve or drain away any abscesses that develop.
Endocarditis is a serious illness, especially if complications develop. Early diagnosis and treatment is vital to improve the outlook for the condition.
Find out more about the treatment of endocarditis
Who's affected
Endocarditis is a rare condition in England, even in those with a higher risk.
It's more common in older people, with half of all cases developing in people aged over 50.
But cases of endocarditis have been recorded in children, particularly those born with congenital heart disease.
Twice as many men are affected as women.
Although it may sound strange, rates of endocarditis are increasing because of advances in medical care.
This is because there's an increasing number of people being treated with valve replacement surgery or surgery to repair congenital heart disease.
Page last reviewed: 27 February 2019
Next review due: 27 February 2022
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright