Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Lumbar decompression surgery
Contents
Overview
When it's used
How it's performed
Recovery
Risks
Lumbar decompression surgery is a type of surgery used to treat compressed nerves in the lower (lumbar) spine.
It's only recommended when non-surgical treatments haven't helped. 
The surgery aims to improve symptoms such as persistent pain and numbness in the legs caused by pressure on the nerves in the spine.
Lumbar decompression surgery is often used to treat:
spinal stenosis – narrowing of a section of the spinal column, which puts pressure on the nerves inside
a slipped disc and sciatica – where a damaged spinal disc presses down on an underlying nerve
spinal injuries – such as a fracture or the swelling of tissue
metastatic spinal cord compression – where cancer in one part of the body, such as the lungs, spreads into the spine and presses on the spinal cord or nerves
What happens during lumbar decompression surgery
If lumbar decompression surgery is recommended, you'll usually have at least 1 of the following procedures:
laminectomy – where a section of bone is removed from 1 of your vertebrae (spinal bones) to relieve pressure on the affected nerve
discectomy – where a section of a damaged disc is removed to relieve pressure on a nerve
spinal fusion – where 2 or more vertebrae are joined together with a section of bone to stabilise and strengthen the spine
In many cases, a combination of these techniques may be used.
Lumbar decompression is usually carried out under general anaesthetic, which means you'll be unconscious during the procedure and won't feel any pain as it's carried out. The whole operation usually takes at least an hour, but may take much longer, depending on the complexity of the procedure.
Recovering from lumbar decompression surgery
You'll usually be well enough to leave hospital about 1 to 4 days after having surgery, depending on the complexity of the surgery and your level of mobility before the operation.
Most people are able to walk unassisted within a day of having the operation, although more strenuous activities will need to be avoided for about 6 weeks.
You may be able to return to work after about 4 to 6 weeks, although you may need more time off if your job involves driving for long periods or lifting heavy objects.
Effectiveness of lumbar decompression surgery
There's good evidence that decompression surgery can be an effective treatment for people with severe pain caused by compressed nerves. 
Many people who have the operation experience a significant improvement in pain. People who found walking difficult before surgery because of leg pain or weakness are often able to walk further and more easily after the operation.
Risks of lumbar decompression surgery
Although lumbar decompression is often successful, like all types of surgery it carries a risk of complications.
Complications associated with lumbar decompression surgery include:
infection at the site of the operation, or in rare cases an infection elsewhere
a blood clot developing in 1 of your leg veins, known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT); in rare cases, the clot can dislodge and travel to the lungs, causing a serious problem called a pulmonary embolism
damage to the spinal nerves or cord – resulting in continuing symptoms, numbness or weakness in 1 or both legs, or in rare cases some degree of paralysis
The spine and spinal cord
The spine is made up of 24 individual bones, called vertebrae, which are stacked on top of each other to form the spinal column. In between each vertebra are protective, circular pads of tissue called discs, which cushion the vertebrae during activities such as walking and running.
The spinal canal runs through the centre of the spinal column. It contains and protects the spinal cord and nerves.
Video: lumbar surgery
In this video, an expert talks about what happens during lumbar surgery.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 12 January 2021
Media review due: 12 January 2024
Page last reviewed: 23 July 2018
Next review due: 23 July 2021
Next
:
When it's used
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright