Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Gallbladder removal
Contents
Overview
What happens
Recovery
Complications
Gallbladder removal surgery, also known as a cholecystectomy, is a very common procedure.
The gallbladder is a small, pouch-like organ in the upper right part of your tummy.
It stores bile, a fluid produced by the liver that helps break down fatty foods.
You don't need a gallbladder, so surgery to take it out is often recommended if you develop any problems with it.
Why does my gallbladder need to be removed?
Surgery to remove the gallbladder is usually carried out if you have painful gallstones.
These are small stones that can form in the gallbladder as a result of an imbalance in the substances that make up bile.
Gallstones often cause no symptoms and you may not realise you have them, but occasionally they can block the flow of bile and irritate the gallbladder (acute cholecystitis) or pancreas (acute pancreatitis).
This can cause symptoms such as:
sudden and intense tummy pain
feeling and being sick
yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice)
Surgery to remove the gallbladder is the most effective treatment in the vast majority of cases.
What happens during gallbladder removal surgery
There are 2 main ways of removing a gallbladder:
laparoscopic (keyhole) cholecystectomy – several small cuts (incisions) are made in your tummy (abdomen) and fine surgical instruments are used to access and remove your gallbladder
open cholecystectomy – a single larger incision is made in your tummy to access and remove your gallbladder
Keyhole surgery is used most often because you can leave hospital sooner, recover faster and are left with smaller scars than with an open procedure.
Both techniques are performed under general anaesthetic, which means you'll be asleep during the operation and won't feel any pain while it's carried out.
Find out more about how gallbladder removal surgery is performed
Recovering from gallbladder removal surgery
It doesn't usually take long to recover from keyhole surgery to remove your gallbladder.
Most people can leave hospital the same day or the next morning.
You'll probably be able to return to most of your normal activities within 2 weeks.
It takes longer to recover from open surgery. You may need to stay in hospital for 3 to 5 days and it could be 6 to 8 weeks before you're feeling back to normal.
Find out more about recovering from gallbladder removal surgery
Living without a gallbladder
You can lead a perfectly normal life without a gallbladder.
Your liver will still make enough bile to digest your food, but instead of being stored in the gallbladder, it drips continuously into your digestive system.
You may have been advised to eat a special diet before surgery, but this doesn't need to be continued afterwards.
Instead, you should aim to have a generally healthy, balanced diet.
Some people experience problems such as bloating or diarrhoea after surgery, although this usually improves within a few weeks. 
If you notice certain foods or drinks trigger these symptoms, you may wish to avoid them in the future.
Find out more about diet after gallbladder surgery
Risks of gallbladder removal surgery
Gallbladder removal surgery is considered to be a safe procedure, but, like any type of surgery, there's a risk of complications.
Possible complications include:
wound infection
bile leaking into the tummy
damage to one of the openings (ducts) carrying bile out of the liver
blood clots
Speak to your surgeon about the benefits and risks of surgery before your operation.
Find out more about the complications of gallbladder removal surgery
Page last reviewed: 08 December 2021
Next review due: 08 December 2024
Next
:
What happens
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright