Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Glandular fever
Glandular fever mostly affects teenagers and young adults. It gets better without treatment, but it can make you feel very ill and last for weeks.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
a very high temperature or you feel hot and shivery
a severe sore throat
swelling either side of your neck – swollen glands
extreme tiredness or exhaustion
tonsillitis that is not getting better
These are glandular fever symptoms.
You do not usually get glandular fever more than once.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP might order a blood test to confirm it's glandular fever and to rule out other illnesses, like tonsillitis. This will test for the Epstein-Barr virus, which causes glandular fever.
The GP will not give you antibiotics. Glandular fever is caused by a virus so antibiotics will not work.
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if you have:
difficulty swallowing
difficulty breathing
severe stomach pain
How to treat glandular fever yourself
There's no cure for glandular fever – it gets better by itself.
Do
rest and sleep
drink plenty of fluids (to avoid dehydration)
take painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen (do not give aspirin to children under 16)
Don’t
do not drink alcohol – your liver might be weak while you have glandular fever
Video: Self-care for glandular fever
This video explains how to treat glandular fever yourself.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 June 2020
Media review due: 1 June 2023
How long glandular fever lasts
You should feel better within 2 to 3 weeks. Some people might feel extremely tired for months.
Try to gradually increase your activity when your energy starts to come back.
Glandular fever can cause your spleen to swell. For the first month, avoid heavy lifting and sports or activities that might increase your risk of falling, as this may damage your spleen.
How to stop glandular fever spreading
Glandular fever is spread through spit, so you can get it through kissing or by sharing cups or cutlery.
You're infectious for up to 7 weeks before you get symptoms.
You can go back to school or work as soon as you start to feel better.
To prevent glandular fever spreading:
Do
wash your hands regularly
wash bedding and clothes that may have spit on them
Don’t
do not kiss others (glandular fever is known as the kissing disease)
do not share cups, cutlery or towels
Glandular fever complications
Most people get better with no problems. But sometimes glandular fever may lead to other problems like:
mild liver inflammation (hepatitis), which causes yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)
low levels of blood cells called platelets (thrombocytopenia)
neurological conditions, such as Guillain-Barré syndrome or Bell's palsy
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 01 December 2020
Next review due: 01 December 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright