Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
The 'male menopause'
Some men develop depression, loss of sex drive, erectile dysfunction, and other physical and emotional symptoms when they reach their late 40s to early 50s.
Other symptoms common in men this age are:
mood swings and irritability
loss of muscle mass and reduced ability to exercise
fat redistribution, such as developing a large belly or "man boobs" (gynaecomastia)
a general lack of enthusiasm or energy
difficulty sleeping (insomnia) or increased tiredness
poor concentration and short-term memory
These symptoms can interfere with everyday life and happiness, so it's important to find the underlying cause and work out what can be done to resolve it.
Is there such a thing as a 'male menopause'?
The "male menopause" (sometimes called the andropause) is an unhelpful term sometimes used in the media.
This label is misleading because it suggests the symptoms are the result of a sudden drop in testosterone in middle age, similar to what occurs in the female menopause. This is not true.
Although testosterone levels fall as men age, the decline is steady at less than 2% a year from around the age of 30 to 40, and this is unlikely to cause any problems in itself.
A testosterone deficiency that develops later in life, also known as late-onset hypogonadism, can sometimes be responsible for these symptoms, but in many cases the symptoms are nothing to do with hormones.
Personal or lifestyle issues 
Lifestyle factors or psychological problems are often responsible for many of these symptoms.
For example, erectile dysfunction, loss of libido and mood swings may be the result of either:
stress
depression
anxiety
There are also physical causes of erectile dysfunction, such as changes in the blood vessels, which may happen alongside any psychological cause.
Find out more about the causes of erectile dysfunction
Psychological problems are typically brought on by work or relationship issues, divorce, money problems or worrying about ageing parents.
A "midlife crisis" can also be responsible. This can happen when men think they have reached life's halfway stage.
Anxieties over what they have accomplished so far, either in their job or personal life, can lead to a period of depression.
Find out more about the male midlife crisis
Other possible causes of the "male menopause" include:
lack of sleep
a poor diet
lack of exercise
drinking too much alcohol
smoking
low self-esteem
Late-onset hypogonadism 
In some cases, where lifestyle or psychological problems do not seem to be responsible, the symptoms of the "male menopause" may be the result of hypogonadism, where the testes produce few or no hormones.
Hypogonadism is sometimes present from birth, which can cause symptoms like delayed puberty and small testes.
Hypogonadism can also occasionally develop later in life, particularly in men who are obese or have type 2 diabetes.
This is known as late-onset hypogonadism and can cause the "male menopause" symptoms.
But this is an uncommon and specific medical condition that's not a normal part of ageing.
A diagnosis of late-onset hypogonadism can usually be made based on your symptoms and the results of blood tests used to measure your testosterone levels.
What to do
If you're experiencing any of these symptoms, see your GP. They'll ask about your work and personal life to see if your symptoms may be caused by a mental health issue, such as stress or anxiety.
If stress or anxiety are affecting you, you may benefit from medication or a talking therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Exercise and relaxation can also help. 
Read about:
stress management
treating anxiety
help for low mood and depression
exercise for depression and exercise to relieve stress
Do I need hormone replacement therapy (HRT)?
Your GP may also order a blood test to measure your testosterone levels.
If the results suggest you have a testosterone deficiency, you may be referred to an endocrinologist, a specialist in hormone problems.
If the specialist confirms this diagnosis, you may be offered testosterone replacement to correct the hormone deficiency, which should relieve your symptoms.
This treatment may be either:
tablets
patches
gels
implants
injections
Page last reviewed: 19 February 2019
Next review due: 19 February 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright