Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Vasculitis
Vasculitis means inflammation of the blood vessels.
Inflammation is your immune system's natural response to injury or infection. It causes swelling and can help the body deal with invading germs.
But in vasculitis, for some reason the immune system attacks healthy blood vessels, causing them to become swollen and narrow.
This may be triggered by an infection or a medicine, although often the cause is unknown.
Vasculitis can range from a minor problem that just affects the skin, to a more serious illness that causes problems with organs like the heart or kidneys.
There are many types of vasculitis. The rest of this page discusses a range of potential causes.
Information:
Coronavirus advice
Get advice about coronavirus and vasculitis from Vasculitis UK
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome)
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, also called Churg-Strauss syndrome, is a type of vasculitis that mainly affects adults aged 30 to 45.
It can cause:
asthma
cold-like symptoms caused by allergies (allergic rhinitis)
a high temperature of 38C or above
muscle and joint pain
tiredness
loss of appetite and weight loss
It can also affect the nerves, causing weakness, pins and needles or numbness, and sometimes damages the kidneys or heart muscle.
It's usually treated with steroid medicine.
The Vasculitis UK website has more information about eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis)
Giant cell arteritis is a type of vasculitis that often affects the arteries in the head and neck. 
It mostly occurs in adults over the age of 50.
It's sometimes called temporal arteritis because the arteries around the temples are often affected.
It can cause:
aching and soreness around the temples
jaw muscle pain while eating
headaches
double vision or vision loss
It also commonly occurs alongside polymyalgia rheumatica.
The main treatment is steroid medicine. 
Find out more about giant cell arteritis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's granulomatosis) 
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis, also called Wegener's granulomatosis, is a type of vasculitis that mainly affects blood vessels in the nose, sinuses, ears, lungs and kidneys.
It mainly affects middle-aged or elderly people.
It can cause:
a high temperature
night sweats
inflammation of the sinuses (sinusitis)
nosebleeds and crusting of the nose
shortness of breath and coughing up blood
kidney problems
It's a serious condition that can be fatal if left untreated, as it can lead to organ failure.
It's usually treated with steroid medicine or other medicines that reduce the activity of the immune system.
Find out more about granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Henoch-Schönlein purpura is a rare type of vasculitis that usually occurs in children and can affect the skin, kidneys or bowel.
It's thought to be triggered by the body reacting to an infection.
It can cause:
a rash that looks like small bruises or reddish-purple spots
joint pain
tummy (abdominal) pain
diarrhoea
being sick
blood in urine or poo
It's not usually serious and tends to get better without treatment.
Find out more about Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Kawasaki disease
Kawasaki disease is a condition that mainly affects children under the age of 5.
The characteristic symptoms are a high temperature that lasts for 5 days or more, with:
a rash
swollen glands in the neck
dry, cracked lips
red fingers or toes
red eyes
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), a solution of antibodies, and aspirin are the 2 main medicines used to treat Kawasaki disease.
Aspirin is not usually recommended for children under 16, so do not give aspirin to your child unless advised to by their doctor.
Find out more about Kawasaki disease
Microscopic polyangiitis
Microscopic polyangiitis is a rare and potentially serious long-term type of vasculitis that most often develops in middle-aged people.
It can affect any organ, but particularly affects the lungs, kidneys and nerves.
It can cause:
a rash
shortness of breath and coughing up blood
red and sore eyes
pins and needles or numbness
kidney problems
It's usually treated with steroid medicine or other medicines that reduce the activity of the immune system.
The Vasculitis UK website has more information about microscopic polyangiitis.
Polyarteritis nodosa
Polyarteritis nodosa is a rare type of vasculitis that particularly affects the arteries supplying the gut, kidneys and nerves.
It tends to develop in childhood or in middle-aged people.
It can sometimes be triggered by an infection, such as hepatitis B, but the exact cause is uncertain.
It can cause:
muscle and joint pain
tummy (abdominal) pain, particularly after eating
a rash
pins and needles or numbness
bleeding and ulcers in the gut
It can be very serious if not treated. The main treatment is steroid medicine, and sometimes other medicines that reduce the activity of the immune system.
The Vasculitis UK website has more information about polyarteritis nodosa.
Polymyalgia rheumatica 
Polymyalgia rheumatica is a type of vasculitis that's closely related to giant cell arteritis. 
It mostly occurs in adults over 50 and is more common in women than men.
It can cause:
pain and stiffness in the shoulders, neck and hips, which is often worse after waking up
a high temperature
extreme tiredness
loss of appetite and weight loss
depression
The main treatment is steroid medicine, which is usually used in lower doses than for giant cell arteritis. 
Find out more about polymyalgia rheumatica
Takayasu arteritis
Takayasu arteritis is a type of vasculitis that mainly affects young women. It's very rare in the UK.
It affects the main artery from the heart, as well as the major arteries branching off it.
It can cause:
extreme tiredness
a high temperature
weight loss
muscle and joint pain
dizziness
shortness of breath
painful, numb or cold limbs
Treatment is usually with steroid medicine.
The Vasculitis UK website has more information about Takayasu arteritis.
Other types of vasculitis 
Behçet's disease
Behçet's disease typically causes mouth ulcers and genital ulcers, and is more common in people from Greece, Turkey, the Middle East, China and Japan.
Buerger's disease
Buerger's disease affects blood vessels in the legs and arms, leading to reduced blood flow to the hands and feet. It's closely linked to smoking.
Cogan's syndrome
Cogan's syndrome is inflammation of the blood vessels in the inner ears and eyes.
Cryoglobulin-associated vasculitis
Cryoglobulin-associated vasculitis is associated with proteins in the blood called cryoglobulins and can occur after a hepatitis C infection.
It causes a rash on the lower limbs, joint pain, nerve damage, tummy (abdominal) pain and kidney problems.
Hypersensitivity vasculitis
Hypersensitivity vasculitis is usually caused by a reaction to a medicine, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or certain antibiotics, and results in a temporary rash.
Primary angiitis of the central nervous system
Primary angiitis of the central nervous system is inflammation of the blood vessels in the brain.
Rheumatoid vasculitis
Rheumatoid vasculitis is vasculitis associated with rheumatoid arthritis.
Page last reviewed: 13 June 2019
Next review due: 13 June 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright