Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Overview
-
Corticobasal degeneration
Contents
Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a rare condition that can cause gradually worsening problems with movement, speech, memory and swallowing.
It's often also called corticobasal syndrome (CBS).
CBD is caused by increasing numbers of brain cells becoming damaged or dying over time.
Most cases of CBD develop in adults aged between 50 and 70.
CBD symptoms
The symptoms of CBD get gradually worse over time. They are very variable and many people only have a few of them.
Symptoms can include:
difficulty controlling your limb on one side of the body (a "useless" hand)
muscle stiffness
shaking (tremors), jerky movements and spasms (dystonia)
problems with balance and co-ordination
slow and slurred speech
symptoms of dementia, such as memory and visual problems
slow, effortful speech
difficulty swallowing
One limb is usually affected at first, before spreading to the rest of the body. The rate at which the symptoms progress varies widely from person to person.
Read more about the symptoms of CBD.
What causes CBD?
CBD occurs when brain cells in certain parts of the brain are damaged as a result of a build-up of a protein called tau.
The surface of the brain (cortex) is affected, as well as a deep part of the brain called the basal ganglia.
Tau occurs naturally in the brain and is usually broken down before it reaches high levels. In people with CBD, it isn't broken down properly and forms harmful clumps in brain cells.
CBD has been linked to changes in certain genes, but these genetic links are weak and the risk to other family members is very low.
Diagnosing CBD
There's no single test for CBD. Instead, the diagnosis is based on the pattern of your symptoms. Your doctor will try to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms, such as Parkinson's disease or a stroke.
You may need to have a brain scan to look for other possible causes of your symptoms, as well as tests of your memory, concentration and ability to understand language.
The diagnosis must be made or confirmed by a consultant with expertise in CBD. This will usually be a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves).
Read more about how CBD is diagnosed.
Treatments for CBD
As someone with CBD can be affected in many different ways, treatment and care is best provided by a team of health and social care professionals working together. Treatments may include:
medication – to improve stiffness and muscle spasms, sleep and mood, pain or memory
physiotherapy – to help with movement and balance difficulties
speech and language therapy – to help with communication and swallowing problems
occupational therapy – to improve the skills and abilities needed for daily activities at home
palliative care and advanced care planning
Read more about how CBD is treated.
Outlook
There is currently no treatment that has been shown to stop CBD getting gradually worse, although treatments can reduce many of the symptoms.
Good care and assistance can help someone with CBD be more independent and enjoy a better quality of life, but the condition will eventually put them at risk of serious complications.
CBD usually changes very slowly. Many people find it helpful to plan ahead with their doctors (GP and specialist) to make decisions about what to do in later stages of the illness.
Difficulty swallowing can cause choking, or inhaling food or liquid into the airways. This can lead to pneumonia, which can be life-threatening.
As a result of these complications, the average life expectancy for someone with CBD is around 6 to 8 years from when their symptoms start. However, this is only an average and CBD is very variable.
Information about you
If you have CBD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS).
This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Find out more about the register.
Page last reviewed: 20 August 2018
Next review due: 20 August 2021
Next
:
Symptoms
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright