Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Joint hypermobility syndrome
Joint hypermobility syndrome is when you have very flexible joints and it causes you pain (you may think of yourself as being double-jointed).
It usually affects children and young people and often gets better as you get older.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you:
often get tired, even after rest
keep getting pain and stiffness in your joints or muscles
keep getting sprains and strains
keep dislocating your joints (they "pop out")
have poor balance or co-ordination
have thin, stretchy skin
have bladder or bowel problems
These can be symptoms of joint hypermobility syndrome.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your GP appointment
A GP will usually test the flexibility of your joints using the Beighton score.
They may also refer you for a blood test or X-ray to help rule out any other conditions like arthritis.
Testing hypermobility – Beighton score
Treating joint hypermobility syndrome
There's no cure for joint hypermobility syndrome.
The main treatment is improving muscle strength and fitness so your joints are better protected.
A GP may refer you to a physiotherapist, occupational therapist or podiatrist for specialist advice.
You can also pay for these services privately.
These physical therapies can help to:
reduce pain and the risk of dislocations
improve muscle strength and fitness
improve your posture and balance
Treating joint pain
Paracetamol and anti-inflammatory painkillers (like ibuprofen, which comes as tablets, gels and sprays) may help to ease pain.
Speak to a pharmacist about the best painkiller for you.
A GP may be able to prescribe stronger painkillers.
If you're in severe pain, a GP may be able to refer you to a pain clinic to help you cope with pain.
To help ease joint pain and stiffness, you can:
have warm baths
use hot water bottles
use heat-rub cream
Information:
Find physiotherapy services
Find occupational therapy services
Find a pharmacy
It may also help to join a support group like the Hypermobility Syndromes Association or Ehlers-Danlos Support UK.
Joint care you can do yourself
If you have joint hypermobility syndrome, there are things you can do to improve joint and muscle strength and reduce strain.
Do
start with low-impact exercise like swimming or cycling if you've not been active before (not doing any exercise can make your symptoms worse)
maintain a healthy weight
wear supportive shoes
wear special insoles (orthotics) in your shoes if a podiatrist has recommended them
Don’t
do not overextend your joints just because you can
do not do repetitive exercises or activities – take regular breaks (called pacing)
Joint hypermobility syndrome in children
Download the Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation Trust's leaflet: Hypermobility Information for parents, carers and schools (PDF, 158kb)
What causes joint hypermobility syndrome
Joint hypermobility syndrome can run in families and it cannot be prevented.
Usually, the joints are loose and stretchy because the ligaments that should make them stronger and support them are weak.
The weakness is because the collagen that strengthens the ligaments is different from other people's.
Most experts agree that joint hypermobility syndrome is part of a spectrum of hypermobility disorders which includes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Some people with hypermobility spectrum disorders do not have symptoms.
Page last reviewed: 06 November 2020
Next review due: 06 November 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright