Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Dandruff
Dandruff is a common skin condition. It's not harmful and you cannot catch it.
Check if it's dandruff
Dandruff causes white or grey flakes of skin to appear on the scalp and in the hair
Credit:
The flakes are often more noticeable in darker hair and if they fall from your scalp on to your shoulders.
Your scalp may also feel dry and itchy.
How to treat dandruff yourself
Use an anti-dandruff shampoo. There are several different types you can buy from pharmacies or supermarkets.
Look for shampoo containing one of these ingredients:
zinc pyrithione
salicylic acid
selenium sulphide (or selenium sulfide)
ketoconazole
coal tar
Your pharmacist can tell you how to use the shampoo.
Use the shampoo for a month to see if your dandruff improves. You might need to try more than one type to find one that works for you.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you still have symptoms after using anti-dandruff shampoo for a month
your dandruff is bad or your scalp is very itchy
your scalp is red or swollen
The GP can check your scalp for skin conditions that could be causing your dandruff.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Causes of dandruff
Dandruff is not caused by poor hygiene, although it may be more obvious if you do not wash your hair regularly.
Stress and cold weather may also make dandruff worse.
A list of conditions that cause dandruff and the main symptoms
Symptoms Possible causes
scaly, itchy and red patches on skin on scalp, face and other areas of the body seborrheic dermatitis
red or silver rash on scalp, sometimes with patchy hair loss tinea capitis, known as ringworm
dry, red, flaky and very itchy skin on areas of the body eczema
red, inflamed (irritated) skin; may also have blisters and cracked skin – reaction to products such as hair dye, sprays, gels or mousses contact dermatitis
red, flaky, crusty and sore patches of skin covered with silvery scales psoriasis
greasy, yellowish crusts on baby's scalp, eyebrows and nappy area cradle cap
Information:
Do not worry if you're not sure what is causing your dandruff. Follow the advice on this page and see a GP if things do not improve in a month.
Page last reviewed: 02 October 2019
Next review due: 02 October 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright