Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Low blood pressure (hypotension)
Low blood pressure is a reading of less than 90/60mmHg. It does not always cause symptoms, but you may need treatment if it does.
Symptoms of low blood pressure
Get your blood pressure checked if you keep getting symptoms like:
lightheadedness or dizziness
feeling sick
blurred vision
generally feeling weak
confusion
fainting
This might mean your blood pressure is too low.
If you get symptoms when you stand up or suddenly change position, you may have postural hypotension.
How to check your blood pressure
You can check your blood pressure:
by asking if a pharmacist can do it
by asking a practice nurse or GP to do it
at home yourself using a home blood pressure monitor – Blood Pressure UK has information about choosing a blood pressure monitor
Low blood pressure is a measurement of less than 90/60mmHg.
Regular blood pressure check
If you're 40 to 74 years old, you should have your blood pressure checked at least once every 5 years as part of the NHS Health Check.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you keep getting symptoms such as dizziness and fainting
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment for low blood pressure depends on the cause
If a cause can be found, a GP will be able to recommend treatment to ease your symptoms.
For example, they may suggest:
changing medicines or altering your dose, if this is the cause
wearing support stockings – this can improve circulation and increase blood pressure
Medicine to increase blood pressure is rarely needed because simple lifestyle measures or treating the underlying cause is usually effective.
How to ease low blood pressure symptoms yourself
Do
get up slowly from sitting to standing
take care when getting out of bed – move slowly from lying to sitting to standing
raise the head of your bed by about 15cm (6 inches) with bricks or heavy books
eat small, frequent meals – lying down or sitting still for a while after eating may also help
increase the amount of water you drink
Don’t
do not sit or stand for long periods
do not bend down or change posture suddenly
do not drink caffeinated drinks at night
do not drink too much alcohol
Causes of low blood pressure
Your blood pressure can vary depending on the time of day. It gradually increases throughout the day.
What you're doing and how you're feeling can also affect it.
There are many possible causes of low blood pressure. It may be low because you're fit and healthy, or you may have inherited it from your parents.
Some people develop low blood pressure as they get older.
It can also be caused by:
being pregnant
some medical conditions, such as diabetes
some medicines
Page last reviewed: 09 September 2020
Next review due: 09 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright