Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Broken toe
A broken toe can be painful, but you do not usually need to go to hospital. There are things you can do to treat it at home.
Check if you have a broken toe
You may have broken your toe if it's:
red or bruised
painful and swollen
difficult to walk on
Information:
Do not worry if you're not sure if it's broken or just bruised, treatment is usually the same for both.
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you have a bad cut or wound after injuring your toe
you have severe pain
it's your child that has hurt or broken their toe
You may need further treatment in hospital, such as a boot, cast or surgery.
111 will tell you what to do. They can tell you the right place to get help if you need to see someone.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
What we mean by severe pain
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E if:
you think you have broken your big toe
your toe is pointing out at an odd angle
the bone is sticking out of your toe
there was a snap, grinding or popping noise at the time of injury
you feel tingling in your toe or foot or it feels numb
What you can do about a broken toe
Doctors will usually suggest you treat a broken toe at home first if:
it's not your big toe
the bone is not sticking out of your foot
your toe is not pointing at an odd angle
there's no wound on your toe
Broken toes usually heal within 4 to 6 weeks, but it can sometimes take several months.
Do
take ibuprofen and paracetamol for the pain and swelling
rest your foot and keep it raised
hold an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel on your toe for up to 20 minutes every few hours
wear wide, comfortable shoes with a low heel
avoid walking around as much as possible
strap up your broken toe – put a small piece of cotton wool or gauze between your sore toe and the toe next to it, then tape them together to support the sore toe
Don’t
do not strap up your toe if it's pointing out at an odd angle or you have hurt your big toe – get medical advice
do not put ice directly on your skin
do not walk or stand for long periods
do not wear tight, pointy shoes
do not play any sports like football, rugby or hockey for 6 weeks or until the pain eases
do not try and treat your child's toe – take them to an urgent treatment centre or A&E
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take
what you need to strap up your toe
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the pain and swelling has not started to ease after 2 to 3 days
it still hurts to walk on after 6 weeks
you have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
They may send you for an X-ray to see if you need any further treatment.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Page last reviewed: 18 January 2019
Next review due: 18 January 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright