Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Breast abscess
A breast abscess is a painful build-up of pus in the breast caused by an infection. It mainly affects women who are breastfeeding.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you have:
a painful, red and warm breast
a lump or swelling in your breast
These can be symptoms of a breast infection or abscess.
You may also have a high temperature and feel generally unwell.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
If you're not sure it's a breast abscess
Treatment from a GP
The GP will refer you to hospital for treatment if they think you have a breast abscess.
They may prescribe antibiotic tablets first if they think you might only have a breast infection.
Important
Go back to the GP if your symptoms do not start to improve within 2 days of starting antibiotics.
Treatment in hospital
You'll have an ultrasound scan of your breast to check for an abscess.
The pus can be drained from an abscess with either:
a needle – this might need to be done a few times, and you may have to go back to hospital each time
a small cut in your skin
Your skin will be numbed before this is done. You can usually go home the same day and may be given antibiotics to take at home.
The abscess should heal completely in a few days or weeks.
Breastfeeding during treatment
Causes of breast abscesses
A breast abscess can form if you have a breast infection (called mastitis) and it's not treated quickly.
Mastitis most often affects breastfeeding women. It can also happen in women who are not breastfeeding, but this is less common.
Getting treatment for mastitis as soon as possible can help reduce the risk of getting an abscess.
Page last reviewed: 25 August 2020
Next review due: 25 August 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright