Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Actinomycosis
Actinomycosis is a rare type of bacterial infection. It can be very serious but can usually be cured with antibiotics.
Treatment for actinomycosis
Actinomycosis is treated with antibiotics. Treatment starts off in hospital with antibiotics given directly into a vein (intravenously).
When you're well enough to go home, you'll be given tablets to take for a few months.
It's important to keep taking antibiotics until they're finished, even when you feel better.
You might also need surgery to drain areas of pus (abscesses) and cut out the surrounding area if it's infected.
Non-urgent advice:
Contact your GP or specialist if:
your symptoms get worse or do not improve after leaving hospital
Get help quickly if treatment does not seem to be working. The infection can spread to other parts of your body and can be life-threatening.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
How you get actinomycosis
The bacteria that cause actinomycosis normally live harmlessly in the body. They only cause an infection if they get into the lining of areas such as the mouth or gut.
You cannot spread the infection to other people.
Any part of the body can be infected, but the head and neck, chest, tummy and pelvis are most commonly affected.
Possible causes of actinomycosis
Possible causes Symptoms
Jaw or mouth: tooth decay, an injury, dental surgery lumps on your cheek or neck, difficulty chewing, pus leaking from small holes in your skin
Lungs: inhaling liquid or food contaminated with the bacteria shortness of breath, chest pain, a cough, pus leaking from small holes in your skin
Tummy: burst appendix, surgery diarrhoea or constipation, pain, a lump or swelling in your tummy, pus leaking from small holes in your skin
Pelvis: leaving an IUD contraceptive coil in for too long pain low down in your tummy, vaginal bleeding or unusual discharge, a lump or swelling in your lower tummy
You cannot always prevent actinomycosis
Actinomycosis is very rare, so the chances of getting it are extremely small.
You can help reduce your risk by:
looking after your teeth and gums
not leaving an IUD in for longer than recommended – they usually last 5 to 10 years, depending on the type you have
Page last reviewed: 09 October 2020
Next review due: 09 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright