Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Knocked-out tooth
A knocked-out adult tooth can usually be saved by putting it back in place or in milk as soon as possible, before seeing a dentist.
What to do if a tooth has been knocked out
If it's an adult (permanent) tooth:
Hold it by the white bit that sticks out of the gum (the crown). Do not touch the root.
Lick it clean if it's dirty, or quickly rinse it in cold running water for no more than 10 seconds.
Try to put it back into the hole in the gum. If it does not go in easily:
put it in milk
put it in saliva – by spitting into a container (if it's your tooth) or having your child spit into a container (if it's theirs)
hold it in your cheek until you see the dentist – but do not have younger children do this in case they swallow it
If it goes back in, bite down gently on a clean cloth to hold the tooth in place.
Go to a dentist as soon as possible.
If it's a baby tooth:
do not put it back in – it could damage the tooth growing underneath
If you do not know if it's an adult or baby tooth:
put it in milk or saliva (by having your child spit into a container) and bring it to the dentist
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
you or your child have knocked out an adult tooth, even if you cannot find it
It's best to get help as quickly as possible.
111 will tell you what to do. They can tell you the right place to get help if you need to see someone.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Other ways to get help
What the dentist will do
If you put the tooth back in, the dentist will check it's in the right place and move it if they need to.
If you brought the tooth in milk or saliva, they'll clean it and put it back in.
They'll then fix the tooth to the teeth either side of it to hold it in place (splinting).
You'll probably need to go back after a couple of weeks to have the splint removed.
If you cannot find the tooth or the dentist is not able to save it, it can normally be replaced with a false tooth.
You may have to pay for your appointment and treatment.
Read more about NHS dental charges and false teeth and other dental treatments.
Page last reviewed: 09 August 2021
Next review due: 09 August 2024
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright