Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Jet lag
Jet lag is when your normal sleep pattern is disturbed after a long flight. It usually improves within a few days as your body adjusts to the new time zone.
Ways to reduce jet lag
Jet lag cannot be prevented, but there are things you can do to reduce its effects.
Get plenty of rest before you travel. You could start going to bed and getting up earlier or later than usual (more like the time zone of the place you're travelling to).
During your flight
Do
drink plenty of water
keep active by stretching and regularly walking around the cabin
try to sleep if it's night time at your destination
use an eye mask and earplugs if they help you sleep
Don’t
do not drink too much caffeine or alcohol – they can make jet lag worse
After you arrive
Do
change your sleep schedule to the new time zone as quickly as possible
set an alarm to avoid oversleeping in the morning
go outside during the day – natural light will help your body clock adjust
Don’t
do not sleep during the day – only sleep at night time
Information:
Short trips
If your trip is short (2 to 3 days), try to eat and sleep at the times you would at home.
There's no treatment for jet lag
Medicines are not usually needed for jet lag.
Jet lag often improves after a few days as your body clock adjusts to the new time zone.
Sleeping tablets may be helpful if you're having problems sleeping (insomnia). But they can be addictive so should only be used for a short time and if symptoms are severe.
Melatonin is a natural hormone released by the body in the evening to let your brain know it's time to sleep.
Melatonin tablets are not recommended for jet lag because there's not enough evidence to show they work.
Symptoms of jet lag
The main symptoms of jet lag are:
difficulty sleeping at bedtime and waking up in the morning
tiredness and exhaustion
difficulty staying awake during the day
poor sleep quality
concentration and memory problems
Jet lag can also sometimes cause dizziness, indigestion, nausea, constipation, changes in appetite and mild anxiety.
Page last reviewed: 03 August 2020
Next review due: 03 August 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright