Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Sick building syndrome
Sick building syndrome is the name for symptoms you get while you're in a particular building. It usually happens in an office, but you can get it in any building.
Check if you have sick building syndrome
Symptoms of sick building syndrome get worse the longer you're in a particular building and get better after you leave.
Other people in the building may also have symptoms.
Possible symptoms include:
headaches
blocked or runny nose
dry, itchy skin
dry, sore eyes or throat
cough or wheezing
rashes
tiredness and difficulty concentrating
Information:
These symptoms are common and can be caused by lots of things. They're unlikely to be a sign of sick building syndrome if you have them all the time, or when you're in lots of different places.
How to ease the symptoms yourself
It might help to:
open windows to improve ventilation, if you can
set the temperature at about 18C and do not change it lots of times during the day
try to reduce stress
take regular screen breaks if you use a computer
go outside for some fresh air during lunchtime and other breaks
Non-urgent advice:
If you think you have sick building syndrome, speak to:
your manager or employer – if you get symptoms at work
the building manager or owner (such as the landlord) – if you get symptoms in another building
They should look into the problem and try to find a solution.
You can also get help and advice from:
the environmental health service at your local authority
your nearest Health and Safety Executive (HSE) office
The HSE has advice for employers and building managers on how to deal with sick building syndrome.
Causes of sick building syndrome
It's not clear exactly what causes sick building syndrome.
It's probably due to a combination of things, such as:
poor ventilation or poorly maintained air conditioning systems
dust, smoke, fumes or fabric fibres in the air
bright or flickering lights
problems with cleaning and layout, such as crowded desks
Sick building syndrome mostly happens in open-plan offices.
Page last reviewed: 22 September 2020
Next review due: 22 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright