Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Constipation
Constipation is common and it affects people of all ages. You can usually treat it at home with simple changes to your diet and lifestyle.
This page is about constipation in adults. There's separate information on constipation in babies and children.
Check if it's constipation
It's likely to be constipation if:
you have not had a poo at least 3 times during the last week
the poo is often large and dry, hard or lumpy
you are straining or in pain when you have a poo
You may also have a stomach ache and feel bloated or sick.
If you're caring for someone with dementia, constipation may be easily missed. It's important to be aware of any changes in their behaviour that might mean they are in pain or discomfort, although it's not always easy.
Read more about dementia behaviour changes
What causes constipation
Constipation in adults has many possible causes. Sometimes there's no obvious reason.
The most common causes include:
not eating enough fibre – such as fruit, vegetables and cereals
not drinking enough fluids
not moving enough and spending long periods sitting or lying in bed
being less active and not exercising
often ignoring the urge to go to the toilet
changing your diet or daily routine
a side effect of medicine
stress, anxiety or depression
Constipation is also common during pregnancy and for 6 weeks after giving birth.
Rarely, constipation may be caused by a medical condition.
How you can treat and prevent constipation yourself
Making simple changes to your diet and lifestyle can help treat constipation.
It's safe to try these simple measures when you're pregnant.
You may notice a difference within a few days. Sometimes it takes a few weeks before your symptoms improve.
Make changes to your diet
To make your poo softer and easier to pass:
drink plenty of fluids and avoid alcohol
increase the fibre in your diet
add some wheat bran, oats or linseed to your diet
Improving your toilet routine
Keep to a regular time and place and give yourself plenty of time to use the toilet.
Do not delay if you feel the urge to poo.
To make it easier to poo, try resting your feet on a low stool while going to the toilet. If possible, raise your knees above your hips.
Consider increasing your activity
A daily walk or run can help you poo more regularly.
Getting started with exercise
Getting active with a disability or long-term condition
Exercise during pregnancy
Video: how to treat constipation
This video shows you how to treat constipation.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 July 2020
Media review due: 1 July 2023
A pharmacist can help with constipation
Speak to a pharmacist if diet and lifestyle changes are not helping.
They can suggest a suitable laxative. These are medicines that help you poo more regularly.
Most laxatives work within 3 days. They should only be used for a short time.
Find a pharmacy
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you:
are not improving with treatment
are regularly constipated and it lasts a long time
are bloated and it lasts a long time
have blood in your poo
have unexpectedly lost weight
feel very tired all the time
are taking medicine that’s causing constipation – such as opioid painkillers
Speak to the GP before you stop taking any prescribed medicine.
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Complications of long-term constipation
Long-term constipation can lead to faecal impaction. This is where poo has built up in the last part of the large intestine (rectum).
The main symptom is diarrhoea after a long bout of constipation.
Faecal impaction may be treated with:
stronger laxatives – prescribed by a GP
a suppository – medicine you place in your bottom
a mini enema – where fluid is passed through your bottom, into your bowel
a healthcare professional removing some of the poo – this is not something you should do yourself
Page last reviewed: 03 September 2020
Next review due: 03 September 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright