Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Get the latest advice about COVID-19
Home Health A to Z
Tinnitus
Tinnitus is the name for hearing noises that are not caused by sounds coming from the outside world. It's common and not usually a sign of anything serious. It might get better by itself and there are treatments that can help.
Check if you have tinnitus
Tinnitus can sound like:
ringing
buzzing
whooshing
humming
hissing
throbbing
music or singing
You may hear these sounds in 1 or both ears, or in your head. They may come and go, or you might hear them all the time.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have tinnitus regularly or constantly
your tinnitus is getting worse
your tinnitus is bothering you – for example, it's affecting your sleep or concentration, or is making you feel anxious and depressed
you have tinnitus that beats in time with your pulse
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
What happens at your appointment
The GP will look in your ears to see if your tinnitus is caused by something they can treat, like an ear infection or a build-up of earwax.
They might also check for any hearing loss.
You may be referred to a specialist for further tests and treatment.
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if you have tinnitus:
after a head injury
with sudden hearing loss, weakness in the muscles of your face, or a spinning sensation (vertigo)
Things you can try to help cope with tinnitus
Do
try to relax – deep breathing or yoga may help
try to find ways to improve your sleep, such as sticking to a bedtime routine or cutting down on caffeine
try to avoid things that can make tinnitus worse, such as stress or loud background noises
try self-help books or self-help techniques to help you cope better from the British Tinnitus Association (BTA)
join a support group – talking to other people with tinnitus may help you cope
Don’t
do not have total silence – listening to soft music or sounds (called sound therapy) may distract you from the tinnitus
do not focus on it, as this can make it worse – hobbies and activities may take your mind off it
Information:
The British Tinnitus Association (BTA) has more information about sound therapy, and runs support groups and a free helpline on 0800 018 0527.
RNID also has a free helpline on 0808 808 0123.
Treatments for tinnitus
If the cause of your tinnitus is unknown or cannot be treated, your GP or specialist may refer you for a type of talking therapy.
This could be:
tinnitus counselling – to help you learn about your tinnitus and find ways of coping with it
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) – to change the way you think about your tinnitus and reduce anxiety
tinnitus retraining therapy – using sound therapy to retrain your brain to tune out and be less aware of the tinnitus
Tinnitus retraining therapy may be available on the NHS for people with severe or persistent tinnitus. It's unclear if tinnitus retraining therapy works for everyone. It's widely available privately.
If tinnitus is causing you hearing loss, hearing aids may be recommended.
Causes of tinnitus
It's not always clear what causes tinnitus, but it's often linked to:
some form of hearing loss
Ménière's disease
conditions such as diabetes, thyroid disorders or multiple sclerosis
anxiety or depression
taking certain medicines – tinnitus can be a side effect of some chemotherapy medicines, antibiotics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and aspirin
Video: Tinnitus (BSL version)
In this video, learn about tinnitus, its possible causes and the effects and how to deal with it.
Play Video
Media last reviewed: 1 June 2021
Media review due: 1 June 2024
Help us improve our website
If you've finished what you're doing, can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey
Page last reviewed: 02 October 2020
Next review due: 02 October 2023
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright