Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
Shin splints
Shin splints is a type of shin pain, usually caused by exercise. It's not serious and there are things you can do to help get better.
Check if you have shin splints
Shin splints usually happen when you do exercise like running.
You will have pain and tenderness along the front of your lower leg (shin).
Things you can do to help
Shin splints usually get better within a few weeks. There are things you can do to get better quicker.
Do
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen vegetables) in a towel on your shin for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
switch to gentle exercise such as yoga or swimming while healing
exercise on soft ground, if you can, when you're feeling better
warm up before exercise and stretch after exercise
make sure your trainers or shoes support your feet properly
Don’t
do not continue doing the exercise that caused your shin splints
do not rush back into exercise at the level you were at – build your exercise routine back up slowly
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you've tried things to help but the pain is not getting better after a week
the pain is getting worse
Information:
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: how to contact a GP
It's still important to get help from a GP if you need it. To contact your GP surgery:
visit their website
use the NHS App
call them
Find out about using the NHS during COVID-19
Treatment from a GP
A GP will ask about your symptoms and examine your leg. If it's not getting better, they may be able to refer you to a physiotherapist.
Physiotherapy from the NHS might not be available everywhere and waiting times can be long. You can also get it privately.
Find a physiotherapist
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 now if:
your shin pain is severe
you've injured your shin
111 will tell you what to do. They can tell you the right place to get help if you need to see someone.
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.
Causes of shin splints
Shin splints happen when you've put too much stress on your leg.
You're more likely to get shin splints if:
you have started exercising after not being active for some time
you run or jump on hard surfaces
you do not have a good running technique
Page last reviewed: 10 December 2019
Next review due: 10 December 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright