Cookies on the NHS website
We've put some small files called cookies on your device to make our site work.
We'd also like to use analytics cookies. These send information about how our site is used to services called Adobe Analytics, Hotjar and Google Analytics. We use this information to improve our site.
Let us know if this is OK. We'll use a cookie to save your choice. You can read more about our cookies before you choose.
I'm OK with analytics cookies Do not use analytics cookies
Search the NHS website
Search
My account
Health A-Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
Browse
More
Home Health A to Z
PIP breast implants
PIP breast implants were withdrawn from the UK in 2010 after it was found they had been fraudulently manufactured with unapproved silicone gel, and were far more prone to splitting (rupturing) than other breast implants.
Research hasn't found any evidence to suggest that PIP implants pose a serious health risk, but they can cause unpleasant symptoms if they rupture and you may be anxious about leaving them in.
If you have PIP implants, you should discuss with a surgeon whether they should be taken out.
The implants don't necessarily need to be removed, but they should be taken out if they rupture or you're worried about this happening.
What are PIP implants?
PIP implants are silicone breast implants containing unapproved silicone gel.
They were manufactured in France by a company called Poly Implant Prostheses (PIP). The concerns relate to all breast implants manufactured by PIP. 
It's estimated around 47,000 British women had PIP implants fitted, most of whom are still living with them.
The vast majority of PIP implants were fitted in private clinics, but a small number were done on the NHS, mostly for breast reconstruction after breast cancer.
Risks of PIP implants
PIP implants are 2 to 6 times more likely to rupture than standard silicone implants.
This doesn't pose a serious risk to your health, but it can cause some unpleasant symptoms.
See your GP if you have signs of a rupture, such as:
lumpiness or swelling in and around the breast
a change in the shape of the breast
redness
pain and tenderness
a burning sensation
enlarged lymph nodes in the armpit
Ruptured PIP implants have no proven long-term health effects. British and European researchers have so far not found any evidence to suggest that the ingredients in the implants can cause cancer or are toxic.
See the British expert review group's final report (PDF, 163kb) and the European Commission's Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR) report (PDF, 963kb) for more information.
How to find out if you have PIP implants
You may have been given details about your breast implants when they were fitted. This will often include information about the manufacturer of your implants.
If you don't have these details, you can ask for them from the clinic or hospital where the implants were fitted. The medical notes kept by your GP may also include this information.
Most women who had PIP implants fitted on the NHS should already have received a letter telling them about it and advising them what to do.
What to do if you have PIP implants
You should get medical advice if you have PIP implants.
If the implants were fitted on the NHS, your GP can arrange for you to see an NHS specialist.
If they were fitted privately, contact the clinic.
If they were fitted privately and the clinic is unable or unwilling to help, speak to your GP about seeing an NHS specialist.
You should have an ultrasound scan or MRI scan to check whether your implants have ruptured. A ruptured implant should be removed as soon as possible.
If there are no signs of a rupture, talk to your surgeon about the benefits and risks of taking the implants out or leaving them in.
If you're concerned about leaving them in, removing them will usually be recommended.
If you decide to keep them in, you should look out for signs of a rupture and have a yearly check-up with your doctor to make sure the implants are still intact.
Removing and replacing PIP implants
Some private clinics have agreed to remove and replace PIP breast implants free of charge, while others charge a fee.
The following clinics have said they will replace PIP implants for free if medically necessary:
BMI Healthcare
HCA International
The Holly Private Hospital
Make Yourself Amazing/MYA Cosmetic Surgery
Nuffield Health
Ramsay Health Care
If the clinic where you had your implants fitted won't help you because it has closed or is unwilling to do so, you may be able to have your implants removed free of charge on the NHS.
However, the NHS in England won't provide replacement implants if your original implants were fitted privately, except in a very small number of cases where they were fitted for medical, rather than cosmetic, reasons.
If you had PIP breast implants originally fitted on the NHS, you may be able to have them removed and replaced by the NHS at no cost.
The operation to remove and replace PIP implants is done wherever possible through the original surgical cuts.
Page last reviewed: 21 January 2019
Next review due: 21 January 2022
Support links
Home
Health A to Z
Live Well
Mental health
Care and support
Pregnancy
NHS services
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
NHS App
Find my NHS number
Your health records
About the NHS
Healthcare abroad
Contact us
Other NHS websites
Profile editor login
About us
Accessibility statement
Our policies
Cookies
© Crown copyright